CANTO I
Midway in the journey of our life I found
myself in a dark wood, for the straight way
was lost. Ah, how hard it is to tell what that
wood was, wild, rugged, harsh; the very
thought of it renews the fear! It is so bitter
that death is hardly more so. But, to treat of
the good that I found in it, I will tell of the
other things I saw there.
I cannot rightly say how I entered it, I was
so full of sleep at the moment I left the true
way; but when I had reached the foot of a
hill, there at the end of the valley that had
pierced my heart with fear, I looked up and
saw its shoulders already clad in the rays of
the planet that leads men aright by every path.
Then the fear was somewhat quieted that had
continued in the lake of my heart through the
night I had passed so piteously. And as he
who with laboring breath has escaped from
the deep to the shore turns to look back on
the dangerous waters, so my mind which was
still fleeing turned back to gaze upon the pass
that never left anyone alive.
After I had rested my tired body a little, I
again took up my way across the desert
strand, so that the firm foot was always the
lower. And behold, near the beginning of the
steep, a leopard light-footed and very fleet,
covered with a spotted hide! And it did not
depart from before my eyes, but did so im
pede my way that more than once I turned
round to go back.
It was the beginning of the morning, and
the sun was mounting with the stars that were
with it when Divine Love first set those beautiful
things in motion, so that the hour of the
day and the sweet season gave me cause for
good hope of that beast with the gay skin;
yet not so much that I did not feel afraid
at the sight of a lion that appeared to me and
seemed to be coming at me, head high and
raging with hunger, so that the air seemed
to tremble at it;
and a she-wolf, that in her leanness seemed
laden with every craving and had already
caused many to live in sorrow she put such
heaviness upon me with the fear that came
from sight of her that I lost hope of the height.
And like one who is eager in winning, but,
when the time comes that makes him lose,
weeps and is saddened in all his thoughts,
such did that peaceless beast make me, as,
coming on against me, she pushed me back,
little by little, to where the sun is silent.
While I was ruining down to the depth
there appeared before me one who seemed
faint through long silence. When I saw him
in that vast desert, I cried to him, Have pity
on me whatever you are, shade or living
man!
No, not a living man, though once I was,
he answered me, and my parents were Lom
bards, both Mantuans by birth. I was born
sub Julio, although late, and I lived at Rome
under the good Augustus, in the time of the
false and lying gods. I was a poet, and I sang
of that just son of Anchises who came from
Troy after proud Ilium was burned. But you,
why do you return to so much woe ? Why do
you not climb the delectable mountain, the
source and cause of every happiness?
Are you, then, that Virgil, that fount
which pours forth so broad a stream of
speech? I answered him, my brow covered
with shame. O glory and light of other poets,
may the long study and the great love that
have made me search your volume avail me!
You are my master and my author. You alone
are he from whom I took the fair style that
has done me honor. See the beast that has
turned me back. Help me against her, famous
sage, for she makes my veins and pulses
tremble.
It behooves you to go by another way if
you would escape from this wild place, he
answered when he saw me weep, for this
beast, the cause of your complaint, lets no
man pass her way, but so besets him that she
slays him; and she has a nature so vicious and
malign that she never sates her greedy appe
tite and after feeding is hungrier than before.
Many are the beasts with which she mates,
and there will yet be more, until the Hound
shall come who will deal her a painful death.
He will not feed on earth or pelf, but on wis
dom, love, and virtue, and his birth shall be
between felt and felt. He shall be the salvation
of that low-lying Italy for which the virgin
Camilla and Euryalus, Turnus, and Nisus
died of their wounds.
He shall hunt her through every town till he
has thrust her back into Hell, whence envy
first sent her forth. Therefore I think and
deem it best that you should follow me, and
I will be your guide and lead you hence
through an eternal place, where you shall
hear the despairing shrieks and see the an
cient tormented spirits who all bewail the
second death. Then you shall see those who
are content in the fire because they hope
to come among the blessed, whensoever that
may be; and to these if you would then as
cend, there shall be a soul worthier than I
to guide you; with her I shall leave you at my
departing. For the Emperor who reigns thereabove wills not that I come into His city,
because I was rebellious to His law. In all
parts is His empire, in that part is His king
dom, there is His city and His lofty seat. Oh,
happy he whom He elects thereto!
And I to him, Poet, I beseech you, by that
God whom you did not know, so that I may
escape this ill and worse, lead me whither
you said just now, that I may see St. Peters
gate and those whom you term so woeful.
Then he set out, and I followed after him.
CANTO II
DaY was departing, and the dark air was
taking the creatures on earth from their la
bors; and I alone was making ready to sus
tain the strife, both of the journey and of the
pity, which unerring memory shall retrace.
O Muses, O high genius, help me now! O
memory that wrote down what I saw, here
shall your worthiness appear!
I began, Poet, you who guide me, consider
if my strength is sufficient, before you trust
me to the deep way. You tell how the father
of Silvius went, while still mortal, to the im
mortal world and was there in his bodily
senses. But that the Adversary of all evil
should show him such favor seems not un
fitting to an understanding mind, consider
ing the high effect that was to spring from
him, and who and what he was;
for in the Empyrean heaven he was chosen as
father of glorious Rome and of her empire,
and both, to say the truth, were established as
the holy place where the successor of great
Peter has his seat. In this journey, which you
affirm he made, he learned things that were
the cause of his victory and of the papal man
tle. Later, the Chosen Vessel went there, that
he might bring thence confirmation of that
faith which is the beginning of the way of
salvation. But I, why do I come there? And
who allows it? I am not Aeneas, I am not
Paul; of this neither I nor others think me
worthy. Wherefore, if I yield and come, I fear
that the coming may be folly. You are wise;
you understand better than I explain it. And
like one who unwills what he has willed and
with new thoughts changes his resolve, so that
he quite gives up the thing he had begun, such
did I become on that dark slope, for by think
ing on it I rendered null the undertaking that
had been so suddenly embarked upon.
If I have well understood what you say,
the shade of that magnanimous one replied,
your spirit is beset by cowardice, which often
times encumbers a man, turning him from
honorable endeavor, as false seeing turns a
beast that shies.
To free you from this fear I will tell you why
I came and what it was I heard when I first
felt pity for you. I was among those who are
suspended, and a lady called me, so blessed
and so fair that I prayed her to command
me. Her eyes were more resplendent than the
stars, and she began to say to me, sweetly and
softly, in an angelic voice, O courteous Man
tuan spirit, whose fame still lasts in the world,
and shall last as long as the world, my friend
and not the friend of Fortunefinds his
way so impeded on the desert slope that he
has turned back in fright; and, from what I
have heard of him in Heaven, I fear he may
already have gone so astray that I am late in
arising to help him. Go now, and with your
fair speech and with whatever is needful for
his deliverance, assist him so that it may con
sole me. I am Beatrice who send you. I come
from a place to which I long to return. Love
moved me and makes me speak. When I am
before my Lord I will often praise you to
Him.
Then she was silent; and I began, O Lady
of virtue, through whom alone mankind rises
beyond all that is contained by the heaven
that circles least,
!
your command so pleases me, that had I
obeyed already it would be late. You have
only to declare your will to me. But tell me
the reason why you are not wary of descend
ing to this center from that spacious region
to which you long to return.
Since you wish to know so deeply, she
answered me, I will tell you briefly why I
am not afraid to come within this place.
Those things alone should be feared that have
power to do one harmnot other things, for
they are not fearful. I am made such by God,
of His grace, that your suffering does not
touch me, and no flame of this burning assails
me. In Heaven there is a gracious lady who
has such pity of this impediment to which I
send you that stern judgment is broken thereabove. She called Lucy, in her request, and
said, Your faithful one has need of you now,
and I commend him to you. Lucy, foe of
every cruelty, arose and, coming to where I
sat with ancient Rachel, said, Beatrice, true
praise of God, why do you not succor him
who bore you such love that for you he left
the vulgar throng ? Do you not hear his pitiful
lament? Do you not see the death that assails
him on that flood over which the sea has no
vaunt?
On earth no one was ever so swift to
seize advantage or to flee from harm as I was
when these words were uttered, to come down
here from my blessed seattrusting in your
noble speech, which honors you and all who
have heard it.
When she had said this to me, she turned
her eyes, which shone with tears, making me
the more eager to come; and so, even as she
wished, I came to you, and rescued you from
the beast that was preventing your going the
short way up the fair mountain. What, then,
is this? Why, why do you hold back? Why
do you harbor such cowardice in your heart?
Why are you not bold and free, when in
Heavens court three such blessed ladies are
mindful of you, and my words pledge you so
great a good?
As little flowers, bent down and closed by
chill of night, straighten and all unfold upon
their stems when the sun brightens them, such
in my faint strength did I become; and so
much good courage rushed to my heart that
I began, as one set free, Oh, how compas
sionate was she who helped me, and how
courteous were you, so quick to obey the
true words she spoke to you! By your words
you have made me so eager to come with
you that I have returned to my first resolve.
-
Now on, for a single will is in us both;
you are my leader, you my master and my
teacher.
So I said to him, and when he moved on,
I entered along the deep and savage way.
Through me you enter the woeful city,
THROUGH ME YOU ENTER ETERNAL GRIEF,
THROUGH ME YOU ENTER AMONG THE LOST.
JUSTICE MOVED MY HIGH MAKER
THE DIVINE POWER MADE ME,
THE SUPREME WISDOM, AND THE PRIMAL LOVE.
BEFORE ME NOTHING WAS CREATED
IF NOT ETERNAL, AND ETERNAL I ENDURE.
ABANDON EVERY HOPE, YOU WHO ENTER.
These words of obscure color I saw in
scribed over a portal; whereupon I said,
Master, their meaning is hard for me. And
he to me, as one who understands, Here
must all fear be left behind; here let all cow
ardice be dead. We have come to the place
where I have told you you will see the
wretched people who have lost the good of
intellect. And when he had placed his hand
on mine, with a cheerful look from which I
took comfort, he led me among the secret
things.
Here sighs, laments, and loud wailings were
resounding through the starless air, so that at
first they made me weep. Strange tongues,
horrible outcries, utterances of woe, accents
of anger, voices shrill and faint, and the beat
ing of hands among them, were making a
tumult that swirls unceasingly in that dark
and timeless air, like sand when a whirlwind
blows. And I, my head circled with error,
said, Master, what is this I hear? And what
people are these who seem so overcome by
pain?
And he to me, Such is the miserable con
dition of the sorry souls of those who lived
without infamy and without praise. They are
mingled with that base band of angels who
were neither rebellious nor faithful to God,
but stood apart. The heavens drive them out,
so as not to be less beautiful; and deep Hell
does not receive them, lest the wicked have
some glory over them.
And I, Master, what is so grievous to them
that it makes them lament so bitterly?
He answered, Very briefly I will tell you.
These have no hope of death, and their blind
life is so abject that they are envious of every
other lot. The world does not suffer that re
port of them shall live. Mercy and justice dis
dain them. Let us not speak of them, but look,
and pass on.
Looking again, I saw a banner that ran so
fast, whirling about, that it seemed it might
never have rest, and behind it came so long a
train of people that I should never have be
lieved death had undone so many. After I
had recognized some among them, I saw and
knew the shade of him who from cowardice
made the great refusal. Straightway I under
stood and knew for certain that this was the
sorry sect of those who are displeasing to God
and to his enemies. These wretches, who
never were alive, were naked and were much
stung by gadflies and wasps there, which were
streaking their faces with blood that mingled
with their tears and was gathered by loath
some worms at their feet.
Then, directing my gaze farther on, I saw
people at the shore of a great river; wherefore
I said, Master, now grant that I may know
who these are, and what law makes them
seem so ready to cross over, as I discern
through the dim light.
And he to me, These things will be made
known to you when we stay our steps at the
dismal stream of Acheron.
Then, with eyes downcast and ashamed,
fearing that my words had displeased him,
I refrained from speaking till we reached the
river.
And behold, an old man, his hair white
with age, coming towards us in a boat and
shouting, Woe to you, wicked souls! Do not
hope to see Heaven ever! I come to carry you
to the other shore, into eternal darkness, into
fire and cold. And you there, living soul,
stand aside from these that are dead. But
when he saw that I did not do so, he said, By
another way, by other ports, not here, you
shall cross to shore. A lighter bark must carry
you.
And my leader to him, Charon, do not
rage. Thus is it willed there where that can
be done which is willed; and ask no more.
Thereon the grizzled cheeks of the ferry
man of the livid marsh, who had wheels of
flame about his eyes, were quiet. But those
forlorn and naked souls changed color, their
teeth chattering, as soon as they heard the
cruel words. They cursed God, their parents,
the human race, the place, the time, the seed
of their begetting and of their birth. Then,
weeping loudly, all drew to the evil shore that
awaits every man who fears not God. The
demon Charon, his eyes like glowing coals,
beckons to them and collects them all, beating
with his oar whoever lingers.
As the leaves fall away in autumn, one after
another, till the bough sees all its spoils upon
the ground, so there the evil seed of Adam
one by one they cast themselves from that
shore at signals, like a bird at its call. Thus
they go over the dark water, and before they
have landed on the other shore, on this side
a new throng gathers.
My son, said the courteous master, those
who die in the wrath of God all come to
gether here from every land; and they are
eager to cross the stream, for Divine Justice
so spurs them that their fear is changed to
desire. No good soul ever passes this way;
therefore, if Charon complains of you, you
can now well understand the meaning of his
words.
When he had ended, the gloomy plain
shook so violently that even now the memory
of my terror bathes me in sweat. The tearsoaked ground gave forth a wind that flashed
a crimson light which overcame all my senses,
and I fell like one who is seized by sleep.
CANTO IV
heavy thunderclap broke the deep sleep
in my head, so that I started like one who
is awakened by force; and, standing up, I
moved my rested eyes around, gazing intently
to make out the place where I was. True it is
that I found myself on the brink of the chasm
of pain, which holds the clamor of endless
wailings. It was so dark and deep and misty
that, though I peered intently down into the
depth, I could make out nothing there.
Let us descend now into the blind world
here below, the poet began, all pale. I will
be first, and you second.
And I, noting his pallor, said, How shall
I come, if you are afraid, who are wont to
encourage me when I hesitate?
And he to me, The anguish of the people
here below paints my face with the pity that
you take for fear. Let us go, for the long way
urges us. So he entered, and had me enter,
the first circle that girds the abyss.
Here there was no plaint, that could be
heard, except of sighs, which caused the eter
nal air to tremble; and this arose from the
sadness, without torments, of the crowds that
were many and great, both of children and of
women and men.
The good master said to me, Do you not
ask what spirits are these that you see ? Now,
before you go farther, I will have you know
that they did not sin; but if they have merit,
that does not suffice, for they did not have
baptism, which is the portal of the faith you
hold; and if they were before Christianity,
they did not worship God aright, and I my
self am one of these. Because of these short
comings, and for no other fault, we are lost,
and only so far afflicted that without hope we
live in longing.
Great sadness seized my heart when I heard
him, for I recognized that people of great
worth were suspended in that Limbo.
Tell me, master, tell me, sir, I began,
wishing to be assured of the faith that con
quers every error,
did ever anyone go forth from here, either
by his own or by anothers merit, who
afterwards was blessed?
And he, who understood my covert speech,
replied, I was new in this condition when I
saw a Mighty One come here, crowned with
sign of victory. He took hence the shade of
our first parent, Abel his son, and Noah, and
Moses, obedient giver of laws, Abraham the
patriarch and David the king, Israel with his
father and his children and with Rachel, for
whom he did so much, and many others; and
He made them blessed. And I would have
you know that before these no human souls
were saved.
We did not cease going on because he
spoke, but all the while were passing through
the wood, I mean the wood of thronging
spirits; nor had we yet gone far from the place
of my slumber when I saw a fire, which over
came a hemisphere of darkness. We were still
a little distant from it, yet not so far but that
I might in part discern that honorable folk
possessed this place.
O you who honor science and art, who are
these that have such honor that it sets them
apart from the condition of the rest?
And he to me, Their honored fame, which
resounds in your life above, wins grace in
Heaven, which thus advances them.
Meanwhile I heard a voice which said,
Honor the great Poet! His shade, which had
departed, now returns.
After the voice had ceased and was still, I
saw four great shades coming to us, in sem
blance neither sad nor joyful. The good mas
ter began, Note him there with sword in
hand who comes before the other three as
their lord. He is Homer, sovereign poet; next
is Horace, satirist; Ovid comes third, and
Lucan last. Since each shares with me the
name the single voice has uttered, they do me
honor, and in that they do well.
Thus I saw assembled the fair school of that
lord of highest song who, like an eagle, soars
above the rest. After they had talked awhile
together, they turned to me with sign of salu
tation, at which my master smiled; and far
more honor still they showed me, for they
made me one of their company, so that I was
sixth amid so much wisdom. Thus we went
onward to the light, talking of things it is
well to pass in silence, even as it was well to
speak of them there.
We came to the foot of a noble castle, seven
times encircled by lofty walls and defended
round about by a fair stream.
This we crossed, as on solid ground, and
through seven gates I entered with these
sages. We came to a meadow of fresh verdure,
where there were people with grave and slowmoving eyes and looks of great authority;
they spoke seldom and with gentle voices.
Then we drew to one side, into an open
place which was luminous and high, so that
we could see all of them. There before me,
on the enameled green, the great spirits were
shown to me, so that I glory within me for
having seen them. I saw Electra with many
companions, among whom I knew Hector,
and Aeneas, and falcon-eyed Caesar armed.
I saw Camilla and Penthesilea; and on the
other side I saw King Latinus, who sat with
his daughter Lavinia. I saw that Brutus who
drove out the Tarquin, I saw Lucretia, Julia,
Marcia, and Cornelia; and by himself apart
I saw Saladin.
When I raised my eyes a little higher, I saw
the Master of those who know, seated in a
philosophic family. All look to him, all do
him honor. There, nearest to him and in front
of the rest, I saw Socrates and Plato; I saw
Democritus, who ascribes the world to chance,
Diogenes, Anaxagoras, and Thales, Empedo
cles, Heraclitus, and Zeno.
I saw the good collector of the qualities of
thingsI mean Dioscoridesand I saw Or
pheus, Tully, Linus, and Seneca the moralist,
Euclid the geometer, and Ptolemy, Hippo
crates, Avicenna, Galen, and Averros, who
made the great commentary. I cannot give
full account of them all, for my long theme
so drives me on, that many times the telling
comes short of the fact.
The company of six diminishes to two; by
another way my wise guide leads me, out of
the quiet, into the trembling air; and I come
to a part where there is naught that shines.
CANTO V
JIhus I descended from the first circle into
the second, which girds less space, and so
much greater woe that it goads to wailing.
There stands Minos, horrible and snarling
upon the entrance he examines their offenses,
and judges and dispatches them according as
he entwines. I mean that when the ill-begotten
soul comes before him, it confesses all; and
that discerner of sins sees which shall be its
place in Hell, then girds himself with his tail
as many times as the grades he wills that it
be sent down. Always before him stands a
crowd of them; they go, each in his turn, to
the judgment; they tell, and hear, and then
are hurled below.
O you who come to the abode of pain,
said Minos to me, when he saw me, pausing
in the act of that great office,
beware how you enter and in whom you
trust; let not the breadth of the entrance de
ceive you! And my leader to him, Why do
you too cry out ? Do not. hinder his fated
going thus is it willed there where that can
be done which is willed; and ask no more.
Now the doleful notes begin to reach me;
now I am come where much wailing smites
me. I came into a place mute of all light,
which bellows like the sea in tempest when
it is assailed by warring winds. The hellish
hurricane, never resting, sweeps along the
spirits with its rapine; whirling and smiting,
it torments them. When they arrive before
the ruin, there the shrieks, the moans, the
lamentations; there they curse the divine
power. I learned that to such torment are
condemned the carnal sinners, who subject
reason to desire.
And as their wings bear the starlings along
in the cold season, in wide, dense flocks, so
does that blast the sinful spirits; hither, thither,
downward, upward, it drives them. No hope
of less pain, not to say of rest, ever comforts
them. And as the cranes go chanting their
lays, making a long line of themselves in the
air, so I saw shades come, uttering wails,
borne by that strife; wherefore I said, Master,
who are these people that are so lashed by the
black air?
The first of these of whom you wish to
know, he said to me then, was empress of
many tongues. She was so given to lechery
that she made lust licit in her law, to take
away the blame she had incurred. She is
Semiramis, of whom we read that she suc
ceeded Ninus and had been his wife she held
the land the Sultan rules. The next is she who
slew herself for love and broke faith to the
ashes of Sichaeus; next is wanton Cleopatra.
See Helen, for whom so many years of ill
revolved; and see the great Achilles, who
fought at the last with love. See Paris, Tris
tan,
and more than
a thousand
shades
whom love had parted from our life he
showed me, pointing them out and naming
them.
When I heard my teacher name the ladies
and the knights of old, pity overcame me and
I was as one bewildered. Poet, I began,
willingly would I speak with those two that
go together and seem to be so light upon the
wind.
And he to me, You shall see when they
are nearer to us; and do you entreat them then
by that love which leads them, and they will
come.
As soon as the wind bends them to us,
I raised my voice, O wearied souls! come
speak with us, if Another forbid it not.
As doves called by desire, with wings raised
and steady, come through the air, borne by
their will to their sweet nest, so did these issue
from the troop where Dido is, coming to us
through the malignant air, such force had my
compassionate cry.
O living creature, gracious and benign,
that go through the black air visiting us who
stained the world with blood, if the King of
the universe were friendly to us, we would
pray Him for your peace, since you have pity
on our perverse ill. Of that which it pleases
you to hear and to speak, we will hear and
speak with you, while the wind, as now, is
silent for us.
The city where I was born lies on that
shore where the Po descends to be at peace
with its followers. Love, which is quickly
kindled in a gentle heart, seized this one for
the fair form that was taken from meand
the way of it afflicts me still. Love, which
absolves no loved one from loving, seized
me so strongly with delight in him, that, as
you see, it does not leave me even now. Love
brought us to one death. Caina awaits him
who quenched our life.
These words were borne to us from them.
And when I heard those afflicted souls I
bowed my head and held it bowed until the
poet said to me, What are you thinking of?
When I answered, I began, Alas! How
many
sweet thoughts, what great desire,
brought them to the woeful pass!
Then I turned again to them, and I began,
Francesca, your torments make me weep for
grief and pity; but tell me, in the time of the
sweet sighs, by what and how did Love grant
you to know the dubious desires?
And she to me, There is no greater sorrow
than to recall, in wretchedness, the happy
time; and this your teacher knows. But if you
have such great desire to know the first root
of our love, I will tell as one who weeps and
tells. One day, for pastime, we read of Lance
lot, how love constrained him; we were alone,
suspecting nothing. Several times that reading
urged our eyes to meet and took the color
from our faces, but one moment alone it was
that overcame us. When we read how the
longed-for smile was kissed by so great a
lover, this one, who never shall be parted from
me, kissed my mouth all trembling. A Gallehault was the book and he who wrote it; that
day we read no farther in it.
While the one spirit said this, the other wept,
so that for pity I swooned, as if in death, and
fell as a dead body falls.
CANTO VI
the
return of my mind which had
closed itself before the piteousness of the two
kinsfolk that had quite overwhelmed me with
sadness, I see about me new torments and
new tormented souls, whichever way I move
and turn about to gaze. I am in the third
circle of the eternal, accursed, cold and heavy
rain its measure and its quality are never
new; huge hail, foul water, and snow pour
down through the murky air; the ground
that receives it stinks. Cerberus, monstrous
beast and cruel, with three throats barks dog
like over the people who are here submerged.
His eyes are red, his beard greasy and black,
his belly wide and his hands taloned; he
claws the spirits, flays and quarters them.
The rain makes them howl like dogs; the
profane wretches often turn themselves, mak
ing of one side a screen for the other.
When Cerberus the great worm perceived
us, he opened his mouths and showed his
fangs; he was aquiver in every limb. And
my leader, reaching out his open hands, took
up earth, and with full fists threw it into the
ravenous gullets. As the dog that barking
craves, and then grows quiet when he snaps
up his food, straining and struggling only to
devour it, such became the foul faces of the
demon Cerberus, who so thunders on the
souls that they would fain be deaf.
We were passing over the shades whom the
heavy rain subdues, and we were setting our
feet upon their emptiness, which seems real
bodies. All were lying on the ground, save
one, who sat up as soon as he saw us pass
before him.
O you that are led through this Hell, he
said to me, recognize me if you can you
were made before I was unmade.
And I to him, The anguish you endure
perhaps takes you from my memory, so that
I do not seem ever to have seen you; but tell
me who you are, who are set in a place so
grievous and who suffer such punishment
that, if any is greater, none is so loathsome.
And he to me, Your city, which is so full
of envy that already the sack runs over, held
me in it, in the bright life. You citizens called
me Ciacco for the ruinous fault of gluttony,
as you see, I am broken by the rain; and I,
in my misery, am not alone, for all these
endure the same penalty for the same fault.
And he said no more.
I answered him, Ciacco, your misery so
weighs upon me that it bids me weep. But
tell me, if you can, what the citizens of the
divided city will come to; and if any one in
it is just; and tell me why such discord has
assailed it.
And he to me, After long contention they
will come to blood, and the rustic party will
drive out the other with much offense. Then,
through the power of one who presently is
temporizing, that party is destined to fall
within three years, and the other to prevail,
long holding its head high and keeping the
other under heavy burdens, however it may
lament and feel the shame. Two men are
just, and are not heeded there. Pride, envy,
and avarice are the three sparks that have
inflamed their hearts. Here he ended his
grievous words.
And I to him, I would have you instruct
me further, and make me a gift of further
speech
Farinata and Tegghiaio, who were so worthy,
Jacopo Rusticucci, Arrigo, and Mosca, and
the others who set their minds on doing good,
tell me where they are and give me to know
them, for great desire urges me to learn
whether Heaven soothes or Hell envenoms
them.
And he, They are among the blackest
souls, and different faults weigh them down
toward the bottom; if you descend that far,
there you can see them. But when you shall
be in the sweet world I pray you recall me
to mens memory. More I do not tell you,
nor do I answer you more. Thereon he
twisted his straight eyes asquint, looked at
me for a moment, then bent his head and fell
down with the other blind ones.
And my leader said to me, He wakes no
more until the angels trumpet sounds and the
hostile Power comes, when each shall find
again his dismal tomb and take again his flesh
and form, and hear that which resounds to
all eternity.
Thus with slow steps we passed along
through the foul mixture of the shades and
of the rain, touching a little on the future
life; wherefore I said, Master, these torments,
will they increase after the great Judgment,
or will they grow less, or will they be just as
burning as now?
t
And he to me, Return to your science,
which has it that the more a thing is perfect,
the more it feels the good, and so the pain.
Although this accursed folk can never come
to true perfection, yet they look to be nearer
it then than now.
We went round along that road, speaking
much more than I repeat, and we came to the
place where the descent is; there we found
Plutus, the great enemy.
CANTO VII
Lap e Satn, pape Satn aleppe! Plutus
began with a clucking voice; and that gentle
sage who knew all, said, to reassure me, Do
not let your fear harm you; for, whatever
power he have, he shall not keep us from
descending this rock. Then he turned back
to that bloated visage and said, Silence, ac
cursed wolf! Consume yourself inwardly with
your own rage. Not without cause is this
journey to the depth; so is it willed on high,
there where Michael avenged the proud rebel
lion. As sails swollen by the wind fall in a
heap when the mainmast snaps, so fell that
cruel beast to the ground.
Thus we descended into the fourth hollow,
taking in more of the dismal bank which in
sacks all the evil of the universe.
Ah, justice of God! who crams together so
many new travails and penalties as I saw?
And why does our guilt so waste us ? As does
the wave, there over Charybdis, breaking it
self against the wave it meets, so must the folk
here dance their round. Here I saw far more
people than elsewhere, both on the one side
and on the other, howling loudly, rolling
weights, which they pushed with their chests;
they clashed together, and then right there
each wheeled round, rolling back his weight,
shouting, Why do you hoard? and Why
do you squander? Thus they returned along
the gloomy circle on either hand to the op
posite point, shouting at each other again
their reproachful refrain; then, having reached
that point, each turned back through his
half-circle to the next joust.
And I, heart-wrung at this, said, Master,
now declare to me who are these people, and
if all these tonsured ones on our left were
clerics.
And he to me, Each and all of these were
so asquint of mind in the first life that they
followed there no right measure in their
spending; most clearly do they bark this out
when they come to the two points of the circle
where opposite fault divides them. These who
have no covering of hair on their head were
clerics, and popes and cardinals, in whom
avarice wreaks its excess.
And I said, Master, among such as these
I ought surely to recognize some who were
polluted with these evils. And he to me,
You harbor a vain thought the undiscern
ing life that made them foul now makes them
dim to all discernment. They will come for
ever to the two buttings; these will rise from
the grave with closed fist, and these with
cropped hair. Ill-giving and ill-keeping have
robbed them of the fair world and set them
to this scufflewhat that is, I spend no fair
words to say. Now can you see, my son, the
brief mockery of the goods that are com
mitted to Fortune, for which humankind
contend with one another; because all the
gold that is beneath the moon, or ever was,
would not give rest to a single one of these
weary souls.
Master, I said, now tell me further this
Fortune which you touch on here, what is it,
which has the goods of the world so in its
clutches?
And he to me, O foolish creatures, how
great is the ignorance that besets you! I
would have you receive my judgment on this
now. Fie whose wisdom transcends all, made
the heavens and gave them guides, so that
every part shines to every part, equally dis
tributing the light. In like manner, for world
ly splendors He ordained a general minister
and guide
who should in due time transfer the vain
goods from race to race, and from one to
another blood, beyond the prevention of hu
man wit, so that one race rules and another
languishes, pursuant to her judgment, which
is hidden like the snake in the grass. Your
wisdom cannot withstand her she foresees,
judges, and pursues her reign, as theirs the
other gods. Her changes know no truce.
Necessity compels her to be swift, so fast do
men come to their turns. This is she who is
much reviled even by those who ought to
praise her, but do wrongfully blame her and
defame her. But she is blest and does not hear
it. Happy with the other primal creatures she
turns her sphere and rejoices in her bliss.
Now let us descend to greater wretched
ness already every star sinks that was rising
when I set out, and to stay overlong is for
bidden.
We crossed the circle to the other edge,
above a fount that boils and pours over by a
trench leading from it. The water was far
darker than perse; and we, in company with
the murky waves, entered down through a
strange way. This dismal little stream, when
it has descended to the foot of the malign
gray slopes, flows into the marsh that is
named Styx;
and I, who was standing intent to gaze,
saw a muddy people in that bog, all naked
and with looks of rage. They were smiting
each other not with hand only, but with
head and chest and feet, and tearing each
other piecemeal with their teeth.
The good master said, Son, you see now
the souls of those whom anger overcame; and
I would also have you know for certain that
down under the water are people who sigh
and make it bubble at the surface, as your
eye tells you wherever it turns. Fixed in the
slime they say, We were sullen in the sweet
air that is gladdened by the sun, bearing
within us the sluggish fumes; now we are
sullen in the black mire. This hymn they
gurgle in their throats, for they cannot speak
it in full words.
Thus we compassed a great arc of that foul
pond between the dry bank and the slough,
with eyes turned on those that swallow the
mire; and we came at length to the foot of
a tower.
CANTO Viii
I say,
continuing, that long before we had
come to the foot of the high tower, our eyes
went upward to its summit because of two
little flames we saw set there, while yet an
other returned the signal from so far off that
the eye could hardly catch it. And I turned
to the sea of all wisdom and said, This one,
what does it mean ? And that other fire, what
does it answer? And who are they that have
made it? And he to me, Over the foul
waves you can already make out what is ex
pected, if the fumes of the marsh do not hide
it from you.
Bowstring never drove arrow from itself
that coursed so swiftly through the air as a
little bark I
saw come towards us then
through the water, piloted by a single boat
man, who cried, Now you are caught, fell
spirit!
Phlegyas, Phlegyas, this time you shout in
vain, said my lord. You shall not have us
longer than while crossing the mire. As one
who listens to some great deception that has
been practiced on him, and then repines at it,
such Phlegyas became in his gathered wrath.
My leader got into the bark, then had me
enter after himand only when I was in it
did it seem laden.
As soon as he and I had embarked, the
ancient prow moves off, cutting more of the
water than it is wont with others. While
we were running through the dead channel,
there rose before me one covered with mud,
and said, Who are you that come before
your time?
And I to him, If I come, I do not remain.
But you, who are you that have become so
foul?
He answered, You see that I am one who
weeps.
And I to him, In weeping and in sorrow
do you remain, accursed spirit, for I know
you, even if you are all filthy.
Then he stretched both his hands to the
boat, whereat the wary master thrust him off,
saying, Away there with the other dogs!
Then he put his arms about my neck, kissed
my face, and said, Indignant soul, blessed is
she who bore you! He was an arrogant one
in the world. No goodness whatever adorns
his memory; so is his shade furious here.
How many up there now account themselves
great kings, that here shall lie like swine
in mire, leaving behind them horrible dis
praises.
And I, Master, I should like well to see
him soused in this soup, before we quit the
lake.
And he to me, Before the shore comes
into view you shall be satisfied. It is fitting
that in such a wish you should be gratified.
A little after this I saw such rending of
him by the muddy folk that I still praise and
thank God for it. All cried, At Filippo Ar
genti!and the irascible Florentine spirit
turned on himself with his teeth.
Here we left him, and I tell no more of
him; but on my ears smote a sound of wail
ing, at which I bend my eyes intently for
ward. The good master said, Now, my son,
the city that is named Dis draws near, with
its grave citizens, with its great garrison.
And I, Master, already I distinctly dis
cern its mosques there within the valley,
red as if they had come out of the fire.
And he to me, The eternal fire that blazes
there within makes them show red, as you
see, in this nether Hell.
We came at last into the deep moats en
trenching that doleful city. The walls seemed
to me to be of iron,
and not until we had made a great circuit
did we come to a place where the boatman
loudly cried, Out with you here! This is
the entrance.
Above the gates I saw more than a thou
sand of those rained down from Heaven,
who cried angrily, Who is this that without
death goes through the kingdom of the
dead? And my wise master made a sign
that he wished to speak with them apart.
Then they restrained somewhat their great
disdain, and said, You come alone, and let
that one depart, who has entered so daringly
into this kingdom. Let him retrace alone his
foolish way; try, if he can!for you shall
stay here, who have escorted him through so
dark a country.
Judge, reader, if I did not lose heart at the
sound of the accursed words, for I did not
think I should ever return here.
O my dear leader, who seven times and
more have restored my confidence and drawn
me from great peril confronting me, do not
leave me thus undone, I said. And if going
farther is denied us, let us quickly retrace our
steps together.
And that lord who had led me thither
said to me, Do not fear, for no one can take
from us our passage, by such a One is it
granted us; but wait for me here, and com
fort your weary spirit and feed it with good
hope, for I will not forsake you in the nether
world.
So he goes away and leaves me there, the
gentle father, and I remain in doubt, as yes
and no contend within my head.
I could not hear what he proposed to them ;
but he was not long there with them when
they all scrambled to get back in. These our
adversaries shut the gates in the face of
my lord, who remained without and turned
back to me with slow steps. He had his eyes
upon the ground, and his brows were shorn
of all boldness, and he was saying with sighs,
Who has denied me the abodes of pain?
And to me he said, Be not dismayed be
cause of my vexation, for I shall prevail in
this, whatever be contrived within to hinder
us. This insolence of theirs is nothing new,
for they showed it once at a less secret gate,
which still stands without a bolt. Over it you
saw the dead inscription; and already, on this
side of it, there comes down the steep, passing
the circles without escort, one by whom the
city shall be opened to us.
CANTO IX
That color which cowardice painted out
wardly on me when I saw my leader turn
back, repressed more speedily his own new
color. He stopped attentive, like a man that
listens, for his eye could not lead him far
through the dark air and the dense fog.
Yet we must win this fight, he began,
or else . . . such did she offer herself to us!
Oh, how long to me it seems till someone
come! I saw well how he covered up the
beginning with the rest that came after,
which were words different from the first;
but none the less his speech gave me fear,
because I drew his broken phrase perhaps to
a worse meaning than it held.
Into this depth of the dismal hollow does
any ever descend from the first circle where
the sole punishment is hope cut off? I asked;
and he answered, It seldom happens that
any of us makes the journey on which I go.
It is true that once before I was down here,
conjured by that cruel Erichtho who was
wont to call back shades into their bodies.
My flesh had been but short while divested
of me, when she made me enter within that
wall to draw forth a spirit from the circle of
Judas. That is the lowest place, and the dark
est, and farthest from the heaven that en
circles all. Well do I know the way, so re
assure yourself. This marsh, which exhales
the mighty stench, girds round the sorrowful
city, wherein now we cannot enter without
anger.
And more he said, but I have it not in
memory, for my eye had wholly drawn me to
the high tower with the glowing summit,
where all at once three hellish blood-stained
Furies had instantly risen up. They had the
limbs and bearing of women, and they were
girt with greenest hydras. For hair they had
little serpents and cerastes bound about their
savage temples. And he, who well recognized
the handmaids of the queen of eternal lamen
tation, said to me, See the fierce Erinyes!
That is Megaera on the left; she that wails
on the right is Alecto; Tisiphone is in
the middle; and with that he was silent.
Each was tearing her breast with her nails;
and they were beating themselves with their
hands, and crying out so loudly that in fear
I pressed close to the poet.
Let Medusa come and well turn him to
stone, they all cried, looking downward.
Poorly did we avenge the assault of The
seus.
Turn your back, and keep your eyes shut;
for should the Gorgon show herself and you
see her, there would be no returning above.
Thus said the master, and he himself turned
me round and, not trusting to my hands,
covered my face with his own hands as well.
O you who have sound understanding,
mark the doctrine that is hidden under the
veil of the strange verses!
And now there came over the turbid waves
a crash of fearful sound, at which both shores
trembled a sound as of a wind, violent from
conflicting heats, which strikes the forest and
with unchecked course shatters the branches,
beats them down and sweeps them away,
haughtily driving onward in its cloud of dust
and putting wild beasts and shepherds to
flight.
He loosed my eyes, and said, Now direct
your sight across that ancient scum, there
where that fume is harshest.
As the frogs before their enemy the snake
all vanish through the water, till each cocks
itself on the bottom,
I saw more than a thousand ruined souls
flee before one that strode dry-shod over
Styx. He was clearing that gross air from
before his face, often moving his left hand
before him, and only with that annoyance
did he seem weary. Well did I perceive that
he was a messenger from Heaven; and I
turned to the master, who signed to me that
I should stand quiet and bow down to him.
Ah, how full of disdain he seemed to me! He
came to the gate, and with a little wand he
opened it, and there was no resistance.
O outcasts from Heaven, race despised,
he began upon the horrible threshold, why
is this insolence harbored in you?
Why
do you kick against that Will which can
never be thwarted of its end, and which
many times has increased your pain? What
does it avail to butt against the fates? Your
Cerberus, if you well remember, still bears
his chin and his throat peeled for doing so.
Then he turned back on the filthy way, and
spoke not a word to us, but looked like one
whom other care urges and incites than that
of those who stand before him.
Then we moved our steps toward the city,
secure after the holy words. We entered it
without any strife; and I, who was eager
to behold the condition which such a fortress
encloses,
cast my eye round about, as soon as I was
in; and on every hand I see a great plain
full of woe and of cruel torment. As at
Arles, where the Rhone slackens its course,
and as at Pola, near the Quarnero, which
shuts Italy in and bathes her borders, the
sepulchers make all the place uneven, so they
did here on every side, save that the manner
here was more bitter; for among the tombs
flames were scattered, whereby they were
made to glow all over, hotter than iron
need be for any craft. Their covers were all
raised up, and such dire laments were issu
ing forth from them as truly seemed to come
from people wretched and suffering.
And I, Master, what are these people who,
buried within these chests, make themselves
heard by their woeful sighs?
And he to me, Here are the heresiarchs
with their followers of every sect, and the
tombs are laden far more than you think.
Like with like is buried here, and the monu
ments are more and less hot.
Then, after he had turned to the right hand,
we passed between the tortures and the high
battlements.
CANTO X
jJow, along a solitary path between the
wall of the city and the torments my master
goes on, and I follow after him.
O supreme virtue, I began, who lead
me round as you will through the impious
circles, speak to me and satisfy my desires.
Might these people who lie within the sepul
chers be seen? Indeed, the covers are all
raised, and no one keeps guard.
And he to me, All shall be closed when
from Jehoshaphat they return here with the
bodies which they have left above. In this
part Epicurus with all his followers, who
make the soul die with the body, have their
burial-place. Therefore, to the question which
you ask me you shall soon have satisfaction
here within, and also to the wish which you
hold from me.
And I, Good leader, I do not keep my
heart hidden from you except in order to
speak little, and to this you have before now
disposed me.
O Tuscan, who go alive through the
city of fire speaking thus modestly, may it
please you to stop in this place. Your speech
clearly shows you a native of that noble
fatherland to which I perhaps did too much
harm. Suddenly this sound issued from one
of the coffers, whereat in fear I drew a little
nearer to my leader. And he to me, Turn
round! what are you doing? See there Fari
nata who has risen erect from the waist
upwards you will see him all.
Already I had fixed my eyes on his, and he
rose upright with chest and brow thrown
back as if he had great scorn of Hell; and
the bold and ready hands of my leader
pushed me between the tombs to him, and
he said, Let your words be fitting.
When I was at the foot of his tomb, he
looked at me for a moment, then, as if in dis
dain, asked me, Who were your ancestors?
And I, who was eager to obey, concealed
nothing, but made all plain to him; where
upon he raised his brows a little; then he
said, They were fiercely adverse to me and
to my forebears and to my party, so that
twice over I scattered them.
If they were driven forth, they returned
from every quarter, both times, I answered
him, but yours have not learned that art
well.
Then there arose to sight alongside of him
a shade, visible to the chin I think he had
raised himself on his knees. He looked round
about me as though he wished to see whether
someone was with me, but when his expecta
tion was quite spent, he said, weeping, If
you go through this blind prison by reason
of high genius, where is my son, and why is
he not with you?
And I to him, I come not of myself.
He who waits yonder, whom perhaps your
Guido had in disdain, is leading me through
here.
Already his words and the manner of his
punishment had read his name to me hence
was my answer so full.
Suddenly straightening up, he cried, How?
Did you say he had? Does he not still live?
Does the sweet light not strike his eyes?
And when he perceived that I made some
delay in answering, he fell supine again
and showed himself no more.
But the other, that great soul at whose
instance I had stopped, changed not his
aspect, nor moved his neck, nor bent his
side. And if, he said, continuing his first
discourse, they have ill learned that art,
that fact torments me more than this bed.
But the face of the Lady who rules here will
not be kindled fifty times before you shall
know how much that art weighs. And, so
may you return some time to the sweet
world, tell me, why is that people so fierce
against my kindred in all its laws? Whereon
I to him, The havoc and the great slaughter,
which dyed the Arbia red, cause such prayers
to be made in our temple.
He sighed, and shook his head, then said,
I was not alone in that, nor surely without
cause would I have moved with the others;
but I was alone there where all agreed to
make an end of Florence, the one who de
fended her before them all.
Ah, so may your seed sometime find
peace, I prayed him, solve the knot which
has here entangled my judgment. It seems,
if I hear aright, that you see beforehand
what time brings with it, but have a different
manner with the present.
Like one who has bad light, we see
the
things,
he
said,
which are remote
from us so much does the Supreme Ruler
still
shine on
us;
but
when
they
draw
near, or are, our intelligence is wholly vain,
and unless others bring us word, we know
nothing of your human state; wherefore you
can comprehend that all our knowledge will
be dead from that moment when the door
of the future shall be closed.
Then, compunctious for my fault, I said,
Will you, now, tell him who fell back
that his
son
is
still
among the
living?
And let him know that, if I was silent in
response to him before, it was because my
thoughts were already in that error which
you have resolved for me.
And now my master was recalling me;
wherefore with more haste I begged the spirit
to tell me who were there with him; and he
said to me, Here I lie with more than a
thousand. Here within is the second Fred
erick, and the Cardinal; and of the rest I do
not speak.
With that he hid himself; and I turned
my steps to the ancient poet, thinking on
the words that seemed hostile to me. He
set out, and then, as we went, he said to me,
Why are you so disturbed? And I satisfied
him in his question.
Let your memory preserve what you have
heard against yourself, that sage bade me,
and now give heed here and he raised
his finger; when you are before her sweet
radiance whose fair eyes see all, from her you
shall know of your lifes journey.
Then he turned his steps to the left and,
leaving the wall, we made our way toward
the middle by a path that strikes into a valley
which even up there annoyed us with its
stench.
CANTO XI
Cn the
edge of a high bank, formed by
huge broken rocks in a circle, we came above
a more cruel pen; and here, because of the
horrible excess of the stench which the deep
abyss throws out, we drew back to the cover
of a great tomb, on which I saw an inscrip
tion that said, I hold Pope Anastasius, whom
Photinus drew from the right path.
We must delay our descent, that the sense
may first accustom itself a little to the vile
breath, and then we shall not heed it. Thus
my master; and I said to him, Pray find
some
compensation,
that
the
time
may
not be lost. And he, Know that I am so
minded.
My son, within these rocks, he then
began, are three lesser circles, one below
another, like those you are leaving.
All are full of accursed spirits; but in order
that hereafter the sight alone may suffice
you, hear how and why they are impounded.
Of every malice that gains hatred in
Heaven the end is injustice; and every such
end, either by force or by fraud, afflicts an
other. But because fraud is an evil peculiar
to man, it more displeases God, and there
fore the fraudulent are the lower, and more
pain assails them.
All the first circle is for the violent
but because violence is done to three persons,
it is divided and constructed in three rings.
To God, to ones self, and to ones neighbor
may violence be done I say to them and to
their things, as shall make plain to you.
By violence death and grievous wounds
may be inflicted upon ones neighbor; and
on his substance, ruins, burnings, and in
jurious extortions; wherefore the first ring
torments all homicides and every one who
smites wrongfully, despoilers and plunderers,
in various troops.
A man may lay violent hand upon him
self, and upon his own property; and there
fore in the second ring must every one repent
in vain who deprives himself of your world,
gambles away and dissipates his substance,
and weeps there where he should be joyous.
hi

Violence may be done against the Deity,
by denying and blaspheming Him in the
heart, and despising Nature and her good
ness; and therefore the smallest ring seals
with its mark both Sodom and Cahors, and
all who speak contemning God in their
heart.
Fraud, which gnaws every conscience, a
man may practice upon one who trusts in
him, or upon one who reposes no confidence.
This latter way seems to sever only the bond of
love which nature makes; wherefore in the
second circle hypocrisy, flatteries, sorcerers,
falsity, theft, simony, panders, barratry, and
like filth have their nest.
By the other way both that love which
Nature makes is forgotten, and that also
which is added to it and which creates a
special trust; therefore, in the smallest circle,
at the center of the universe and the seat of
Dis, every traitor is consumed eternally.
And I, Master, your discourse proceeds
most clearly, and full well distinguishes this
chasm and the people that it holds; but tell
me they of the fat marsh, and they whom
the wind drives, and they whom the rain
beats, and they who clash with such rough
tongues, why are they not punished within
the ruddy city, if Gods anger is upon them?
And if it is not, why are they in such plight?
And he said to me, Why does your wit
so wander beyond its wont? Or your mind,
whither does it gaze? Do you not remember
the words with which your Ethics treats the
three dispositions which Heaven wills not
incontinence, malice, and mad bestiality ?
and how incontinence less offends God and
incurs less blame? If you consider well this
doctrine, and bring to mind who they are
that suffer punishment above, outside, you
will see clearly why they are divided from
these wicked spirits, and why the divine
vengeance smites them with less wrath.
O sun that heal every troubled vision,
you do content me so, when you solve, that
questioning, no less than knowing, pleases
me; but turn back a little, I said, to where
you say that usury offends the divine Good
ness, and loose the knot.
Philosophy, for one who understands it,
he said to me, points out, not in one place
alone, how Nature takes her course from di
vine Intellect and from Its art; and if you
note well your Physics, you will find, after not
many pages, that your art, as far as it can,
follows her, as the pupil does his master; so
that your art is as it were grandchild of God.
ri
By these two, if you remember Genesis at the
beginning, it behooves man to gain his bread
and to prosper. But because the usurer takes
another way, he contemns Nature in herself
and in her follower, for he puts his hope else
where.
But follow me now, for it pleases me to
go the Fishes are quivering on the horizon,
and all the Wain lies over Caurus, and there,
farther on, is the descent of the cliff.
n
CANTO XII
The place where we came for the descent
of the bank was alpine, and such, because of
what was there, that every eye would shun it.
Like the ruin which struck the Adige in
its flank, on this side of Trent, either by
earthquake or through failure of support,
where, from the top of the mountain whence
it started, to the plain, the rock is so tum
bled down as to give some passage to anyone
abovesuch was the descent of that ravine;
and on the edge of the broken chasm was
outstretched the infamy of Crete that was
conceived in the false cow. And when he
saw us he bit himself, like one whom wrath
rends inwardly.
My sage cried out toward him, Perhaps
you believe that here is the Duke of Athens,
who dealt you your death up in the world.
Get you gone, beast, for this man does not
come tutored by your sister, but journeys
here to sec your punishments.

As a bull that breaks loose in the moment
when it has received the mortal blow, and
cannot go, but plunges this way and that, so
I saw the Minotaur do. And my wary guide
cried, Run to the passage while he is in fury
it is well that you descend.
So we took our way down over that rocky
debris, which often moved under my feet with
the new weight. I was going along thinking,
and he said, Perhaps you are thinking on this
ruin, guarded by that bestial wrath which I
quelled just now. Know then that the other
time I came down here into the nether Hell
this rock had not yet fallen. But certainly, if
I reckon rightly, it was a little before He
came who took from Dis the great spoil of
the uppermost circle, that the deep foul val
ley trembled so on all sides that I thought
the universe felt love, whereby, as some
believe,
the world has many times been
turned to chaos; and at that moment this
ancient rock, here and elsewhere, made such
downfall. But fix your eyes below, for the
river of blood draws near, in which boils
everyone who by violence injures others.
O blind cupidity and mad rage, which in
the brief life so goad us on, and then, in the
eternal, steep us so bitterly!
I saw a wide ditch bent in an arc, as one
embracing all the plain, according as my guide
had said, and between it and the foot of the
bank were centaurs running in a file, armed
with arrows, as in the world they were wont
to go to the chase. Seeing us coming down
they all stopped and from the band three
came forward, with bows and shafts which
they first selected; and one cried from a dis
tance, To what torment do you come, you
who descend the slope? Tell us from there;
if not, I draw my bow!
My master said, Our answer we will make
to Chiron there beside you; to your own hurt
was your will ever thus hasty. Then he
nudged me and said, That is Nessus, who
died for the beautiful Dejanira and himself
wrought vengeance for himself; and the one
in the middle, who gazes on his own breast,
is the great Chiron, he who brought up
Achilles; the other is Pholus, who was so
full of rage. Around the ditch they go by
thousands, piercing with their arrows what
ever spirit lifts itself out of the blood more
than its guilt has allotted to it.
We drew near to those fleet beasts; and
Chiron took an arrow and, with the notch
of it, brushed back his beard upon his jaws;
and when he had uncovered his great mouth,
he said to his companions, Have you ob
served that the one behind moves what he
touches ?

The feet of the dead are not wont to do so.
And my good leader, who was now at his
breast, where the two natures are consorted,
replied, Indeed he is alive, and thus alone
have I to show him the dark valley necessity
brings him to it, and not sport. From singing
halleluiah, came one who gave me this new
office. He is no robber, nor I a thievish spirit;
but by that Power by which I move my steps
on so wild a road, give us one of your band
whom we may keep beside, that he may show
us where the ford is, and carry this one on
his back, who is not a spirit that can go
through the air.
Chiron bent round on his right breast and
said to Nessus Go back and guide them,
then; and if another troop encounters you,
make it give way.
We moved on then with the trusty escort,
along the edge of the crimson boiling, in
which
the boiled
were uttering piercing
shrieks. I saw people in it, down even to the
eyebrows, and the great centaur said, These
are tyrants who took to blood and plunder.
Here they lament their merciless crimes here
is Alexander, and cruel Dionysius who made
Sicily have woeful years; and that brow with
the hair so black is Azzolino, and that
other blond one is Opizzo of Este who up

in the world was indeed slain by his step
son. Then I turned to the poet, and he
said, Let him be first guide to you now,
and me second.
A little farther on the centaur stopped be
side a people who seemed to issue from
that boiling stream as far as the throat. He
showed us a spirit on one side alone and said,
That one clove, in Gods bosom, the heart
which on the Thames still drips with blood.
Then some I saw who had their heads, and
even all their chests, out of the stream; and
of these I recognized many. Thus more and
more that blood sank down till it cooked
only the feet; and here was our passage of
the ditch.
As on this hand you see that the boiling
stream continually diminishes, said the cen
taur, so I would have you believe that on
this other it lowers its bed more and more,
until it comes round again to the place where
tyranny must groan. Divine justice there
goads that Attila who was a scourge on earth,
and Pyrrhus and Sextus; and forever milks
the tears, unlocked by the boiling, from
Rinier of Corneto and Rinier Pazzo, who
made such warfare upon the highways.
Then he turned back and crossed the ford
again.
I
CANTO XIII
IJessus had not yet reached the other side
when we moved forward through a wood
which was not marked by any path. No
green leaves, but of dusky hue; no smooth
boughs, but gnarled and warped; no fruits
were there, but thorns with poison. Those
wild beasts that hate tilled lands between
Cecina and Corneto do not have thickets
so rough or dense. Here the foul Harpies
make their nests, who drove the Trojans
from the Strophades with dismal announce
ment of future ill; they have broad wings,
and human necks and faces, feet with claws,
and their great bellies are feathered; they make
lament on the strange trees.
And the good master began to say to me,
Before you enter farther, know that you
are in the second ring, and shall be, until

you come to the horrible sand. Look well,
therefore, and you shall see things that would
make my words incredible.
I heard wailings uttered on every side, and
saw no one who made them; wherefore, all
bewildered, I stopped. I believe that he be
lieved that I believed that all those voices
from amid the trunks came from people
who were hidden from us. Therefore the
master said, If you break off a little branch
from one of these plants, the thoughts you
have will all be cut short. Then I stretched
my hand a little forward and plucked a twig
from a great thornbush, and its stub cried,
Why do you break me? And when it had
become dark with blood, it began again to
cry, Why do you tear me? Have you no
spirit of pity? We were men, and now are
turned to stocks. Truly your hand ought to
be more merciful had we been souls of ser
pents.
As from a green brand that is burning at
one end, and drips from the other, hissing
with the escaping air, so from that broken
twig came out words and blood together;
whereon I let fall the tip, and stood like
one who is afraid.
If he, O wounded spirit, had been able to
believe before, replied my sage, what he
had never seen save in my verses,

he would not have stretched forth his hand
against you; but the incredible thing made
me prompt him to a deed that grieves me.
But tell him who you were, so that by way
of some amends he may refresh your fame
in the world above, whither it is allowed
him to return.
And the stub said, You so allure me with
your sweet words that I cannot keep silent;
and may it not burden you that I am enticed
to talk a little. I am he who held both the
keys of Fredericks heart, and turned them,
locking and unlocking, so softly that from
his secrets I kept almost every one. So faith
ful was I to the glorious office that for it I
lost both sleep and life. The harlot that never
turned her whorish eyes from Caesars house
holdthe common death and vice of courts
inflamed all minds against me; and they, in
flamed, did so inflame Augustus that my glad
honors were changed to dismal woes. My
mind, in scornful temper, thinking by dying
to escape from scorn, made me unjust against
my just self. By the new roots of. this tree
I swear to you that I never broke faith with
my lord, who was so worthy of honor. And if
one of you returns to the world, let him com
fort my memory which still lies prostrate
from the blow that envy gave it.

The poet waited a little, then said to me,
Since he is silent, do not lose time, but speak
and ask of him, if you would know more.
To which I answered, Do you ask him
further of what you think may satisfy me,
for I cannot, such pity fills my heart.
Therefore he began again, So may this
man do freely what you ask of him, impris
oned spirit, may it please you to tell us
further how the soul is bound in these knots;
and tell us, if you can, whether from such
members any soul is ever loosed.
Then the stub puffed hard, and soon that
breath was changed into this voice, You
shall be answered briefly. When the fierce
soul quits the body from which it has up
rooted itself, Minos sends it to the seventh
gullet. It falls into the woods, and no part is
chosen for it, but wherever fortune flings it,
there it sprouts like a grain of spelt; it shoots
up to a sapling, and to a wild growth; the
Harpies, feeding then upon its leaves, give
pain and to the pain an outlet. Like the
rest we shall come, each for his cast-off
body, but not, however, that any may inhabit
it again; for it is not just that a man have
what he robs himself of. Hither shall we
drag them, and through the mournful wood
our bodies will be hung, each on the thornbush of its nocuous shade.

We were still attentive to the stub, believ
ing it might wish to say more to us, when
like one aware of the wild boar and the chase
approaching his post, who hears the beasts
and the branches crashing, we were surprised
by an uproar. And behold, two on the left
hand,
naked
and
torn,
fleeing
so
hard
that they were breaking every tangle of the
wood. The one in front was shouting, Now
come, come quickly, death! and the other,
thinking himself too slow, Lano, your legs
were not so nimble at the jousts of the
Toppo! and perhaps because breath was
failing him, he made one knot of himself
and of a bush. Behind them the wood was
full of black bitches, eager and fleet, like
greyhounds loosed from the leash. On him
who had squatted they set their teeth and tore
him piecemeal, then carried off those woeful
limbs.
My escort then took me by the hand and
led me to the bush, which was lamenting
in vain through its bleeding fractures. O
Jacopo da Santo Andrea, it cried, what
have you gained by making a screen of me?
What blame have I for your sinful life?
When my master had stopped beside it,
he said, Who were you, that through so
many wounds blow forth with blood your
doleful speech?

And it to us, O souls, who have arrived
to see the shameful havoc that has thus torn
my leaves from me, collect them at the foot
of the wretched bush. I was of the city that
changed her first patron for the Baptist, on
which account he with his art will ever make
her sorrowful; and were it not that at the
passage of the Arno some semblance of him
still remains, those citizens who afterwards
rebuilt it on the ashes left by Atdla would
have labored in vain. I made me a gibbet of
my own house.
CANTO XIV
Because the love of my native place con
strained me, I gathered up the scattered twigs
and gave them back to him who was already
faint of voice. Thence we came to the con
fine, where the second ring is divided from
the third and where a horrible mode of jus
tice is seen.
To make these new things clear, I say we
reached a plain which rejects all plants from
its bed. The woeful wood is a garland round
about it, as round the wood the dismal ditch.
Here we stayed our steps at the very edge.
The ground was a dry deep sand, not differ
ent in its fashion from that which once was
trodden by the feet of Cato.
O vengeance of God, how much should
you be feared by all who read what was re
vealed to my eyes!
I saw many herds of naked souls, who were
all lamenting very miserably; and different
laws seemed to be imposed upon them. Some
were lying supine upon the ground, some
sitting all crouched up, and others were going
about incessantly. Those who moved about
were far more numerous, and those who
were lying in the torment were fewer, but
they gave more tongue to their pain.
Over all the sand huge flakes of fire were
falling slowly, like snow in the mountains
without a wind. As the flames which Alex
ander, in those hot regions of India, saw fall
upon his army, entire to the ground, whereat
he had his legions tramp the soil, because the
flakes were better extinguished before they
spread, so did the eternal burning descend
there, and the sand was kindled by it like
tinder under the flint, to redouble the pain.
The dance of the wretched hands was ever
without repose, now here, now there, as they
beat off the fresh burning.
I began, Master, you who overcome all
things except the obdurate demons that came
out against us at the entrance of the gate,
who is that great one who seems not to heed
the fire, and lies disdainful and scowling, so
that the rain seems not to ripen him?

And that same one, who had perceived
that I was asking my leader about him, cried
out, What I was living, that am I dead.
Though Jove weary out his smith, from
whom in anger he took the sharp bolt by
which on my last day I was smitten; and
though he weary out the others, turn by turn,
in Mongibello at the black forge, crying,
Good Vulcan, help, help! even as he did
at the fight of Phlegra, and hurl at me with
all his might, he would not have thereby
glad vengeance.
Then my leader spoke with such force as
I had not heard him use before, O Capaneus!
in that your pride remains unquenched you
are punished the more no torment save your
own raging would be pain to match your
fury. Then he turned round to me with
gentler look, saying, That was one of the
seven kings who besieged Thebes, and held,
and seems to hold, God in disdain and prize
Him little; but as I said to him, his revilings
are quite fitting adornments to his breast. Now
come along behind me, and see that you do
not set your feet upon the burning sand, but
keep them back ever close to the woods.
In silence we came to where there spurts
forth from the forest a little stream whose
redness makes me shudder yet.

As issues from the Bulicame a rivulet which
then the sinful women share among them
selves, so this ran down across the sand. Its
bottom and both its banks were made of
stone, as were the margins on the side; where
fore I perceived that our passage was there.
In all that I have shown to you since we
entered through the gate whose threshold is
denied to no one, nothing has been discerned
by your eyes so notable as the present stream,
which quenches every flame above it. These
were the words of my leader; wherefore I
prayed him to bestow on me the food for
which he had bestowed the appetite.
In the middle of the sea there lies a wasted
country, he then said, which is named
Crete, under whose king the world once was
chaste. A mountain is there, called Ida, which
once was glad with waters and with foli
age; now it is deserted like a thing outworn.
Rhea chose it of old for the faithful cradle
of her son and, the better to conceal him
when he cried, made them raise shouts
there. Within the mountain stands the great
figure of an Old Man, who holds his back
turned
toward
Damietta,
and
gazes
on
Rome as on his mirror his head is fashioned
of fine gold, his arms and breast are pure
silver, then down to the fork he is of brass,

and down from there is all of choice iron,
except that the right foot is baked clay, and
he rests more on this than on the other. Every
part except the gold is cleft by a fissure that
drips with tears which, collected, force a pas
sage through the cavern there. Their course
is from rock to rock into this valley they
form Acheron, Styx, and Phlegethon; then
their way is down by this narrow channel
until, there where there is no more descend
ing, they form Cocytusand what that pool
is, you shall see; here therefore I do not de
scribe it.
And I to him, If the present stream flows
down thus from our world, why does it ap
pear to us only at this border?
And he to me, You know that the place
is circular; and though you have come far,
always to the left in descending to the bot
tom, you have not yet turned through the
whole circle; wherefore if aught new appears
to us, it should not bring wonder to your
face.
And I again, Master, where are Phlege
thon and Lethe found? for about the one
you are silent, and the other you say is formed
by this rain.
Truly you please me in all your ques
tions, he answered, but the boiling of the
red water should well solve one that you ask.

Lethe you shall see, but out of this abyss,
there where the souls go to wash themselves,
when the fault repented of has been re
moved.
Then he said, Now it is time to quit the
wood; see that you come behind me the
margins, which are not burning, form a path,
and over them every flame is quenched.
CANTO XV
Now one of the hard margins bears us
on, and the vapor from the stream over
shades, so that it shelters the water and the
banks from the fire. As the Flemings be
tween Wissant and Bruges, fearing the tide
that rushes in on them, make the bulwark
to drive back the sea; and as the Paduans do
along the Brenta, to protect their towns and
castles before Carentana feels the heat; in
like fashion were these banks made, except
that the builder, whoever he was, made them
neither so high nor so thick.
We were already so far removed from the
wood that I should not have seen where it
was had I turned to look back, when we met
a troop of souls that were coming alongside
the bank, and each looked at us as men look
at one another under a new moon at dusk;
and they knit their brows at us as the old
tailor does at the eye of his needle.
Eyed thus by that company, I was recog
nized by one who took me by the hem, and
cried, What a marvel! And I, when he
reached out his arm to me, fixed my eyes on
his scorched face, so that the baked features
did not prevent my knowing him, and reach
ing down my hand toward his face, I an
swered, Are you here, ser Brunetto!
And he, O my son, let it not displease
you if Brunetto Latino turns back a little
with you, and lets the train go on.
I beg it of you with all my heart, I said
to him, and if you wish me to sit with you,
I will, if it please him there with whom
I go
O son, he said, whoever of this flock
stops even for an instant must then lie a hun
dred years without brushing off the fire
when it strikes him. Therefore go on I will
come at your skirts, and then will rejoin my
band who go lamenting their eternal woes.
I dared not descend from the path to go
on a level with him, but I kept my head
bowed like one who walks in reverence. He
began, What chance or destiny brings you
down here before your last day, and who is
this that shows the way?

There above, in the bright life, I an
swered him, I went astray in a valley, before
my age was at the full. Only yesterday morn
ing I turned my back on it. He appeared to
me, as I was returning into it, and by this
path he leads me home.
And he to me, If you follow your star
you cannot fail of a glorious port, if, in the
fair life, I discerned aright; and if I had
not died so soon, seeing heaven so kind to
you, I would have cheered you in your work.
But that thankless, malignant people, who of
old came down from Fiesole, and still smack
of the mountain and the rock, will make
themselves an enemy to you because of your
good deeds; and there is cause for among
the bitter sorb-trees it is not fitting that the
sweet fig should come to fruit. Old report in
the world calls them blind; it is a people ava
ricious, envious and proud look that you
cleanse yourself of their customs. Your for
tune holds for you such honor that the one
party and the other shall be ravenous against
you, but the grass shall be far from the goat.
Let the Fiesolan beasts make fodder of them
selves, and not touch the plant if any spring
yet upon their dungheap in which survives
the holy seed of those Romans who remained
there when it became the nest of so much
wickedness.

If my prayer were all fulfilled, I answered him, you would not yet be banished
from human nature, for in my memory is
fixed, and now saddens my heart, the dear,
kind, paternal image of you, when in the
world hour by hour you taught me how man
makes himself eternal; and how much I hold
it in gratitude it behooves me, while I live,
to declare in my speech. That which you tell
me of my course I write, and keep with a
text to be glossed by a lady who will know
how, if I reach her. This much I would have
you know so conscience chide me not, I am
prepared for Fortune as she wills. Such ear
nest is not strange to my ears; therefore let
Fortune whirl her wheel as pleases her, and
the yokel his mattock.
Thereon my master turned round on his
right and looked at me, then said, He who
notes it listens well.
None the less I go on speaking with ser
Brunetto, and ask him who are the most
noted and most eminent of his companions.
And he to me, It is well to know of
some of them; about the rest it is well
that we be silent, as the time would be too
short for so much talk. In brief, know that
all were clerks, and great men of letters and
of great fame, in the world defiled by one
same sin.

Priscian goes on with that wretched crowd,
and Francesco dAccorso too; and you could
also have seen there, had you hankered for
such scurf, him who was transferred by
the
Servant
of
Servants
from
Arno
to
Bacchigliene, where he left his sinfully dis
tended muscles. would say more, but my
going and my speech must not be longer, for
I see yonder a new smoke rising from the
sand people are coming with whom I must
not be. Let my Treasure, in which I yet live,
be commended to you, and I ask no more.
Then he turned back, and seemed like one
of those who run for the green cloth in the
field at Verona, and of them seemed he who
wins, not he who loses.
CANTO XVI
lLready I was in a place where the reXXV
sounding of the water which was falling into
the next circle was heard, like the hum which
beehives make, when three shades set out
together running, from a troop that was pass
ing under the rain of the fierce torment. They
came towards us, each crying, Stop, you who
by your dress seem to us to be from our
degenerate city! Ah me, what wounds old
and new I saw in their members, burnt in
by the flames! It pains me yet, only to re
member it.
My teacher gave heed to their cries, then
turned his face to me and said, Now wait
to these one should show courtesy; and were
it not for the fire which the nature of this
place darts, I should say that haste befitted
you more than them.

As we stopped, they resumed their ancient
wail, and when they reached us, all three
made of themselves a wheel. As champions,
naked and oiled, are wont to do, eying their
grip and vantage before exchanging thrusts
and blows; thus each, wheeling, directed his
face on me so that his neck kept turning in
a direction contrary to his feet.
And, If the wretchedness of this sandy
place and our blackened and hairless faces,
one of them began, bring us and our prayers
into contempt, let our fame move you to tell
us who you are, that thus securely move liv
ing feet through Hell. He whose tracks you
see me trample, though he goes naked and
peeled, was of greater degree than you think
grandson of the good Gualdrada, his name
was Guido Guerra, and in his lifetime he
did much with counsel and with sword.
This other, who treads the sand behind me, is
Tegghiaio Aldobrandi, whose voice should
have been prized up in the world; and I who
am placed with them in torment was Jacopo
Rusticucci, and truly my fierce wife more
than aught else has wrought me ill.
Had I been sheltered from the fire I would
have thrown myself down among them, and
I think my teacher would have permitted it;

but since I should have been burnt and
baked, fear overcame my good will which
made me greedy to embrace them. Then I
began, Not contempt, but sorrow, your con
dition fixed within me, so deeply that it will
not leave me soon, when this my lord said to
me words by which I felt that such men as
you might be coming. I am of your city, and
always have I rehearsed and heard with af
fection your deeds and honored names. I am
leaving the gall, and I go for sweet fruits
promised me by my truthful leader; but first
I must go down to the center.
So may your soul long direct your limbs,
and your fame shine after you, he then re
plied, tell us if courtesy and valor abide in
our city as once they did, or if they are quite
gone from it, for Guiglielmo Borsiere, who
has been but short while in pain with us and
goes yonder with our company, greatly af
flicts us with his words.
The new people and the sudden gains
have engendered pride and excess in you,
O Florence, so that already you weep for it!
This I cried with uplifted face; and the three,
who understood this to be my answer,
looked at each other as men look on hearing
the truth.

If at other times it costs you so little to
satisfy others, they all replied, happy you
if you can speak thus at will. Therefore, if
you escape from these dark regions and re
turn to see again the beautiful stars, when
you shall rejoice to say, I was there, see that
you speak of us to others. Then they broke
their wheel and in their flight their nimble
legs seemed wings; an Amen could not
have been uttered so quickly as they van
ished; wherefore it seemed well to my master
to depart. I followed him; and we had gone
but a little way when the sound of the water
was so near that we could scarcely have heard
each other speak. As that river which is first
to hold its own course from Mount Viso east
ward, on the left slope of the Apennine
called the Acquacheta above, before it de
scends into its low bed, and at Forl loses
that nameroars there over San Benedetto
dellAlpe, falling in one cataract when there
might well have been a thousand; thus, down
from a precipitous bank we found that dark
water resounding, so that in short while it
would have hurt our ears.
I had a cord girt round me, and with
it I once thought to take the gay-skinned
leopard.

After I had quite loosed it from me, as my
leader bade, I passed it to him knotted and
coiled. Whereon he, turning to the right,
flung it some distance out from the edge,
down into the depth of that abyss.
Surely,
I
said to
myself, something
strange will answer the strange signal which
the master so follows with his eye.
Ah, how careful one should be with those
who not only see the deed, but have the wit
to read ones thoughts! Soon will come up
what I look for and what your mind dreams
of, he said to me; soon must it be dis
covered to your sight.
To that truth which has the face of a lie a
man should always close his lips so far as he
can, for through no fault of his it brings re
proach; but here I cannot be silent; and,
reader, I swear to you by the notes of this
Comedyso may they not fail of lasting
favorthat I saw, through that thick and
murky air, come swimming upwards a figure
amazing to every steadfast heart, even as he
returns who sometimes goes down to loose
the anchor that is caught on a reef or some
thing else hidden in the sea, who stretches
upwards his arms and draws in his feet.
CANTO XVII

JDehold the beast with the pointed tail,
that passes mountains and breaks walls and
weapons! Behold him that infects all the
world! Thus my leader began to speak to me;
and he beckoned him to come to shore near the
end of our rocky path. And that foul image
of fraud came onward, and landed his head
and his bust, but he did not draw his tail
onto the bank. His face was the face of a
just man, so benign was its outward as
pect, and all his trunk was that of a ser
pent; he had two paws, hairy to the armpits;
his back and breast and both his sides were
painted with knots and circlets. Tartars or
Turks never made cloth with more colors
of groundwork and pattern, nor were such
webs laid on the loom by Arachne.
m

As sometimes boats lie at the shore, part
in the water and part on land, and as there
among the guzzling Germans the beaver
settles himself to wage his war, so lay that
worst of beasts upon the edge of stone which
bounds the sand. All his tail was quivering
in the void, twisdng upward its venom
ous fork, which had the point armed like a
scorpions.
My leader said, Now we must bend our
way a little, as far as that evil beast which is
couching yonder. We descended, therefore,
on the right hand side and took ten steps
upon the verge, so as to keep well away
from the sand and the flames. And when we
had come to him, I see upon the sand, a little
farther onwards, people sitting near the empty
space.
Here the master said to me, That you
may carry away full experience of this ring,
go and see their condition. Let your talk there
be brief. Till you return I will speak with
this beast, that he may lend us his strong
shoulders.
So I went by myself still farther along
the extreme margin of that seventh circle,
where the woeful people were seated. Their
grief was bursting forth through their eyes;
with their hands they defended themselves,
now here, now there, sometimes from the
flames, sometimes from the burning ground;

not otherwise do the dogs in summer, now
with muzzle, now with paw, when they are
bitten by fleas, or flies, or gadflies. When I
set my eyes on the faces of some of these
on whom the grievous fire descends, I did not
recognize any of them, but I perceived that
from the neck of each hung a pouch, which
had a certain color and a certain device, and
thereon each seems to feast his eyes. And
when I came among them, looking about, I
saw, upon a yellow purse, azure that had the
form and bearing of a lion. Then, gazing
farther, I saw another, red as blood, display
a goose whiter than butter. And one, who
had his white wallet marked with an azure
and gravid sow, said to me, What are you
doing in this ditch? Now get you gone! And
since you are still alive, know that my neigh
bor Vitaliano shall sit here at my left side.
With these Florentines am I, a Paduan; often
they din my ears, shouting, Let the sovereign
knight come who will bring the pouch with
three goats! Then he twisted his mouth
and stuck out his tongue, like an ox that
licks its nose; and I, fearing lest a longer
stay should anger him who had admonished
me to stay but little, turned back from the
weary souls.

I found my leader already mounted on the
croup of the fierce beast, and he said to me,
Now be strong and bold henceforward the
descent is by such stairs as these. Mount in
front, for I wish to be between, so that the
tail may not harm you. As one who has the
shivering-fit of the quartan so near that his
nails are already pale, and he trembles all
over at the mere sight of shade, such I be
came at these words of his; but shame re
buked me, which makes a servant brave in
the presence of a good master. I seated my
self on those ugly shoulders, and I wanted to
say but the voice did not come as I thought,
See that you embrace me! But he who at
other times had succored me in other peril
clasped me in his arms and steadied me as
soon as I was mounted up, then said, Geryon,
move on now; let your circles be wide, and
your descending slow remember the new
burden that you have.
As the bark backs out little by little from
its place, so Geryon withdrew thence; and
when he felt himself quite free, he turned his
tail to where his breast had been, and, stretch
ing it out, moved it like an eel, and with his
paws gathered the air to himself. I do not
think
that there
was
greater
fear
when
Phathon let loose the reins, whereby the sky,
as yet appears, was scorched,

nor when the wretched Icarus felt his loins
unfeathering by the melting wax, and his
father cried to him, You go an ill way!
than was mine when I saw that I was in the
air on every side, and saw extinguished every
sight, save of the beast. He goes swimming
slowly on, wheels and descends, but I per
ceive it only by a wind upon my face and
from below. I heard now on our right the
whirlpool making a horrible roaring below
us, wherefore I stretch forth my head and
look down. Then I became more terrified at
the descent, for I saw fires and heard laments,
whereat, trembling, I cling the closer. And I
saw thenfor I had not seen it beforethe
descending and the circling, by the great evils
which were drawing near on every side.
As the falcon that has been long on the
wingthat, without seeing lure or bird, makes
the falconer cry, Ah, ah, youre coming
down!descends weary, with many a wheel
ing, to where it set out swiftly, and alights
disdainful and sullen, far from its master
so, at the very foot of the jagged rock, did
Geryon set us down at the bottom, and, dis
burdened of our persons, vanished like an
arrow from the string.
CANTO XVIII
JIhere is a place in Hell called Malebolge,
all of stone which is the color of iron, like
the wall that goes round it. Right in the
middle of this malign field yawns a pit very
wide and deep, of whose structure I shall tell
in its place. That belt, therefore, which re
mains between the pit and the foot of the
high hard bank is circular, and it has its
bottom divided into ten valleys. Such a figure
as where, for guard of the walls, successive
ditches encircle castles, the place where they
are presents, such an image did these make
here. And as in such strongholds from their
thresholds to the outer bank are little bridges,
so from the base of the cliff ran crags which
traversed the embankments and the ditches
as far as the pit, which cuts them off and
collects them.

In this place we found ourselves dropped
from the back of Geryon, and the poet held
to the left, and I came on behind. On the
right hand I saw new woe, new torments,
and new scourgers, with which the first ditch
was replete. At its bottom were the sinners,
naked; on our side of the middle they came
facing us, and, on the other side, along with
us, but with greater strides thus the Romans,
because of the great throng, in the year of
the Jubilee, have taken measures for the peo
ple to pass over the bridge, so that on one
side all face toward the Castle and go to St.
Peters, and on the other they go toward the
Mount. Along the dark rock, on this side and
on that, I saw horned demons with large
scourges, who smote them fiercely from be
hind. Ah, how they made them lift their
heels at the first blows! Truly none waited
for the second or the third!
While I was going on, my eyes were met
by one of them, and instantly I said, This
fellow Ive certainly seen before; wherefore
I paused to make him out, and my gentle
leader stopped with me and gave me leave
to go back a little. And that scourged soul
thought to hide himself, lowering his face,
but it availed him little, for I said, You
there, casting your eye on the ground,

if the features you wear are not false, are
Venedico Caccianemico. But what brings you
to such pungent sauces?
And he to me, Unwillingly I tell it, but
your plain speech, which makes me remem
ber the former world, compels me. I was he
who brought Ghisolabella to do the will of
the Marquis, however the vile story may be
reported. And I am not the only Bolognese
who laments here; nay, this place is so full of
them, that so many tongues are not now
taught, between Savena and Reno, to say
sipa and if of this you wish assurance or
testimony, recall to mind our avaricious na
ture. As he spoke thus, a demon smote him
with his lash, and said, Off, pander! There
are no women here to coin.
I rejoined my escort; then, with but a few
steps, we came to where a reef went out from
the bank. This we very easily ascended and,
turning to the right upon its jagged ridge,
we quitted those eternal circlings.
When we were at the place where it yawns
beneath to give passage to the scourged, my
leader said, Stop, and let the sight of these
other ill-born souls strike on you, whose faces
you have not seen, for they have been going
along with us.

From the old bridge we viewed the train
that was coming towards us on the other side,
likewise driven by the scourge. The good
master, without my asking, said to me, Look
at that great one who comes, and seems to
shed no tear for pain. What a regal aspect he
yet retains! That is Jason, who by courage
and by craft despoiled the Colchians of the
ram. He passed by the isle of Lemnos when
the bold and pitiless women had given all
their males to death. There, with tokens and
with fair
words, he deceived the young
Hypsipyle who first had deceived all the rest.
He left her there pregnant and forlorn such
guilt condemns him to such torment; and
Medea too is avenged. With him go all who
practice such deceit; and let this suffice for
knowledge of the first valley and of those it
holds in its fangs.
We were now where the narrow path
intersects with the second embankment and
makes of that the abutment to another arch.
From there we heard people whining in the
next pouch, and puffing with their muzzles
and smiting themselves with their palms.
The banks were crusted over with a mold
from the vapor below that sticks on them
and that did battle with the eyes and with
the nose.

The bottom is so deep that we could nowhere
see it without mounting to the crown of the
arch where the ridge rises highest. Hither we
came, and thence I saw down in the ditch a
people plunged in filth that seemed to have
come from human privies.
And while I was searching down there with
my eyes, I beheld one whose head was so be
fouled with ordure that it did not appear
whether he was layman or cleric. He bawled
to me, Why are you so greedy to look more
at me than at the other filthy ones? And I
to him, Because, if I rightly recall, I have
seen you before with your hair dry, and you
are Alessio Interminei of Lucca; therefore do
I eye you more than all the rest. And he,
then, beating his pate, Down to this the flat
teries wherewith my tongue was never cloyed
have sunk me.
Hereupon my leader said to me, Now
push your look a little further forwards, so
that your eye may fully reach the face of that
foul and disheveled wench who is scratching
herself there with her filthy nails, now squat
ting, now standing. She is Thais the whore,
who answered her paramour when he said,
Have I great favor with you?Nay, won
drous! And therewith let our sight be satis
fied.
CANTO XIX
O Simon Magus!
O you his wretched fol
lowers that, rapacious, prostitute for gold and
silver the things of God which ought to be
the brides of righteousness! now must the
trumpet sound for you, since you are in the
third pouch.
We were now at the next tomb, having
climbed to that part of the reef which hangs
directly over the middle of the ditch. O Su
preme Wisdom, how great is the art which
Thou showest in heaven, on earth, and in the
evil world! and how justly does Thy Power
dispense !
Upon the sides and upon the bottom I saw
the livid stone full of holes, all of one size
and each was round. They seemed to me
not less wide or larger than those that are
made for the baptizings in my beautiful
San Giovanni;

one of which, not many years ago, I broke to
save one who was drowning in itand let
this be the seal to undeceive all men.
From the mouth of each projected the feet
of a sinner and his legs as far as the calf, and
the rest was within. They all had both their
soles on fire, because of which their joints
were twitching so hard that they would have
snapped ropes and withes. As flame on oily
things is wont to move only on their outer
surface, so it did there, from the heels to
the toes.
Master, who is that who writhes himself,
twitching more than all his fellows, I said,
and who is sucked by a ruddier flame? And
he to me, If you will have me carry you down
there by that more sloping bank, from him
self you shall learn of him and of his wrongs.
And I, Whatever pleases you is to my
liking you are my lord and you know that
I depart not from your will; and you know
that which is left unsaid.
Then we came onto the fourth dike, turned
and descended on our left, down to the per
forated and narrow bottom; and the good
master did not set me down from his side
till he had brought me to the hole of him who
was lamenting with his shanks.
O wretched soul, whoever you are that,
planted like a stake, have your upper part
down under! I began, speak if you can.

I was standing there like the friar who con
fesses the perfidious assassin who, after he is
fixed, recalls him in order to delay his death;
and he cried, Are you already standing
there, are you already standing there, Boni
fazio? By several years the writ has lied to
me. Are you so quickly sated with those gains
for which you did not fear to take by guile
the beautiful Lady, and then to do her out
rage?
I became like those who stand as if bemocked, not comprehending what is answered
them and unable to reply. Then Virgil said,
Tell him quickly, I am not he, I am not he
whom you think! and I answered as I was
bidden; whereat the spirit writhed hard both
his feet; then, sighing, and with tearful voice,
he said to me, Then what is it you ask of
me? If to know who I am concerns you so
much that you have for that come down the
bank, know that I was vested with the great
mantle; and I was truly a son of the she-bear,
so eager to advance the cubs that up there I
pursed my gains, and here I purse myself.
Beneath my head are the others that preceded
me in simony, mashed down and flattened
through the fissures of the rock. I shall be
thrust down there in my turn when he comes
for whom I mistook you when I put my
sudden question.

But longer already is the time that I have
cooked my feet and stood inverted thus than
he shall stay planted with glowing feet, for
after him shall come a lawless shepherd from
the west, of uglier deeds, one fit to cover both
him and me. A new Jason he will be, like
him we read of in Maccabees, but even as to
that one his king was pliant, so to this one
shall be he who governs France.
I do not know if here I was overbold, in
answering him in just this strain, Pray now
tell me how much treasure did our Lord re
quire of Saint Peter before he put the keys
into his keeping? Surely he asked nothing
save Follow me. Nor did Peter or the others
take gold or silver of Matthias when he was
chosen for the office which the guilty soul had
lost. Therefore stay right here, for you are
justly punished; and guard well the ill-got
gain that made you bold against Charles.
And were it not that reverence for the Great
Keys which you held in the glad life even
now forbids it to me, I would use yet harder
words, for your avarice afflicts the world,
trampling down the good and exalting the
bad. It was shepherds such as you that the
Evangelist had in mind when she that sitteth
upon the waters was seen by him committing
fornication with the kings

she that was born with the seven heads, and
from the ten horns had her strength, so long
as virtue pleased her spouse. You have made
you a god of gold and silver; and wherein do
you differ from the idolators, save that they
worship one, and you a hundred? Ah, Con
stantine, of how much ill was mother, not
your conversion, but that dowry which the
first rich Father took from you! And while
I intoned these notes to him, whether anger
or conscience stung him, he kicked hard with
both his feet. And indeed I think it pleased
my guide, with so satisfied a look did he keep
listening to the sound of the true words
uttered. Thereupon he took me in his arms,
and when he had me quite on his breast, re
mounted by the path where he had descended;
nor did he tire of holding me clasped to him
self, but carried me up to the summit of the
arch which is the crossway from the fourth
to the fifth dike. Here he gently set down
his burden, gently because of the rugged and
steep crag, which would be a hard passage
for goats; and from there another valley was
disclosed to me.
CANTO XX
Of new punishment I must make verses,
and give matter to the twentieth canto of the
first canzone, which is of the submerged.
I was now all prepared to look into the
depth disclosed to me, which was bathed with
tears of anguish, and through the circular
valley I saw a people coming, silent and weep
ing, at the pace made by litanies in this world.
As my sight went lower on them, each seemed
to be strangely distorted between the chin
and the beginning of the chest, for the face
was turned toward the loins, and they had
to come backwards, since seeing forward was
denied them. Perhaps some time by stroke
of palsy a man has been thus twisted right
around, but I have not seen it, nor do I
believe it possible.

Reader, so God grant you to take profit of
your reading, think now for yourself how I
could keep my cheeks dry when near at hand
I saw our image so contorted that the tears
from the eyes bathed the buttocks at the
cleft. Truly I wept, leaning on one of the
rocks of the hard crag, so that my guide said
to me, Are you even yet among the other
fools? Here pity lives when it is altogether
dead. Who is more impious than he who
sorrows at Gods judgment?
Raise, raise your head, and see him for
whom the earth opened before the eyes of
the Thebans, whereat they all cried, Whither
are you rushing, Amphiaraus? Why are you
leaving the war? And he stopped not from
falling headlong down to Minos, who seizes
every one. See how he has made a breast of
his shoulders because he wished to see too
far before him, he looks behind and makes
his way backwards.
See
Tiresias,
who
changed
semblance
when from male he became female, trans
forming all his members; and afterwards he
had to strike again the two entwined ser
pents with his rod before he could resume his
manly plumes.
He that backs up to the others belly is
Aruns who, in the hills of Luni where grubs
the Carrarese who dwells beneath,

had a cave for his abode among the white
marbles, from which he could observe the
stars and the sea with unobstructed view.
And she that covers her bosom, which you
cannot see, with her loose tresses, and has on
that side all her hairy parts was Manto, who
searched through many lands, then settled in
the place where I was bornand on this I
would have you hear me for a little. After her
father had departed from life and the city of
Bacchus had become enslaved, she wandered
for a long time about the world. Up in fair
Italy, at the foot of the mountains that bound
Germany above Tirol, lies a lake which is
called Benaco. By a thousand springs, I think,
and more, the region between Garda and
Val Camonica and Pennino is bathed by
the water which settles in that lake, and in
the middle of it is a spot where the pastors of
Trent and Brescia and Verona, if they went
that way, might give their blessing. Peschiera,
a beautiful and strong fortress to confront the
Brescians and the Bergamese, sits where the
shore around is lowest. There all the water
that in the bosom of Benaco cannot stay must
descend
and
make
itself
a
river,
down
through green pastures. Soon as the water
starts to run, it is no longer named Benaco,
but Mincio, as far as Govrnolo, where it
falls into the Po;

and after a short course it comes to a level
where it spreads and makes a marsh that
sometimes in summer is unwholesome. The
cruel virgin, passing that way, saw land in
the middle of the fen, untilled and without
inhabitants. There, to shun all human fellow
ship she stopped with her servants to practice
her arts, and lived, and left there her empty
body. Afterwards the people who were scat
tered round about gathered to that place,
which was strong because of the marsh it
had on all sides. They built the city over
those dead bones, and for her who first chose
the place they called it Mantua, without other
augury. Once the people within it were more
numerous, before the folly of Casalodi was
tricked by Pinamonte. Therefore I charge
you, if you ever hear other origin given to
my city, let no falsehood defraud the truth.
And I, Master, your words are to me so
certain and do so hold my confidence, that
all others would be to me as dead coals. But
tell me, of the people who are passing, if you
see any that are worthy of note, for to that
alone does my mind revert.
Then he to me, That one, who from the
cheek spreads his beard over his swarthy
shoulders, was augur when Greece was left
so empty of males

that they scarcely remained for the cradles,
and with Calchas he gave the moment for
cutting the first cable at Aulis. Eurypylus was
his name, and thus my high Tragedy sings of
him in a certain passageas you know well,
who know the whole of it. That other who
is so spare in the flanks was Michael Scot,
who truly knew the game of magic frauds.
See Guido Bonatti; see Asdente, who now
would fain have attended to his leather and
his thread, but too late repents. See the
wretched women who left the needle, the
spool, and the spindle, and became fortune
tellers; they wrought spells with herbs and
with images.
But now come, for already Cain with his
thorns holds the confines of both the hemi
spheres, and touches the wave below Seville;
and already last night the moon was round.
You must remember it well, for it did you
no harm sometimes in the deep wood.
Thus he spoke to me, and we went on the
while.
CANTO XXI
Thus from bridge to bridge we came
along, talking of things of which my Comedy
is not concerned to sing, and we had reached
the summit, when we stopped to see the next
cleft of Malebolge and the next vain lamenta
tions and I saw it strangely dark.
As in the Arsenal of the Venetians, in win
ter, the sticky pitch for caulking their un
sound vessels is boiling, because they cannot
sail then, and instead, one builds his ship
anew and another plugs the ribs of his that
has made many a voyage, one hammers at the
prow and another at the stern, this one makes
oars, that one twists ropes, another patches
jib and mainsail; so, not by fire but by di
vine art, a thick pitch was boiling there
below, which overglued the bank on every
side. It I saw, but in it I saw nothing save
the bubbles raised by the boiling, and all of
it swelling up and settling down together.

While I was gazing fixedly down on it, my
leader, saying, Watch out, watch out! drew
me to himself from the place where I was
standing. Then I turned round like one who
is eager to see what he must shun, and who is
dismayed by sudden fear, so that he looks
back but does not delay his flight to look,
and behind us I saw a black devil come run
ning up along the crag. Ah, how savage he
was in aspect and how fierce he seemed in
act, with outspread wings and light on his
feet. His shoulder, which was sharp and
high, was laden by both haunches of a sinner,
and he held him grasped by the tendons of
the feet.
He spoke from our bridge, O Malebranche,
heres one of Saint Zitas Elders! Thrust him
under, while I go back for more, to that city
where theres a fine supply of them every
man there is a barrator, except Bonturo; there
they make Ay of No, for cash.
Down he hurled him, and turned back on
the hard crag, and never was an unleashed
mastiff so swift in pursuit of a thief. The
sinner sank under and rose again, rump up;
but the devils, who were under cover of the
bridge, cried, Heres no place for the Holy
Face! Here youll swim otherwise than in the
Serchio! And so, unless you want to feel our
grapples, do not come out above the pitch.

Then they struck him with more than a
hundred prongs, and said, Here youll have
to dance under cover, so grab on secretly, if
you can. Just so cooks make their scullions
plunge the meat down into the cauldron with
their forks, that it may not float.
The good master said to me, That it may
not be seen that you are here, squat down
behind a jag, so that you may have some
screen for yourself; and whatever outrage be
done to me, be not afraid, for I know about
things here and was in a like fray once
before.
Then he passed on beyond the head of the
bridge, and when he arrived upon the sixth
bank he had need to show a steadfast front.
With the fury and uproar of dogs that rush
out upon some poor beggar who straightway
begs from where he stops, these rushed out
from under the little bridge and turned all
their hooks against hirr But he cried, Let
none of you be savage! Before you touch me
with your forks, let one of you come forward
to hear me, and then decide about grappling
me.
All cried, Let Malacoda go; whereon,
while the rest stood still, one moved and came
up to him, saying, What will it avail him?
Do you think, Malacoda, to see me come
here, said my master, secure thus far against
all your defenses,

without divine will and propitious fate? Let
us pass, for it is willed in Heaven that I show
another this savage way. Then was his pride
so fallen, that he let the hook drop at his
feet, and said to the others, Now let no one
strike him.
And my leader to me, Oh you that sit
asquat among the splinters of the bridge,
securely now return to me. Wherefore I
moved and quickly came to him; and the
devils all pressed forward, so that I feared
they might not keep the pact. Thus I once
saw the soldiers afraid who were coming out
of Caprona under pledge, seeing themselves
among so many enemies. I drew near to my
leader, pressing in close to him, and did not
turn my eyes from their looks, which were
not good. And they lowered their forks, one
of them saying, Shall I touch him on the
rump? and another answering, Yes, see that
you nick it for him. But that demon who
was speaking with my leader turned round
instantly, saying, Hold, hold, Scarmiglione!
Then he said to us, To go farther by this
crag will not be possible, for the sixth arch
lies all shattered at the bottom; but if it is
still your pleasure to go forward, then proceed
along this ridge nearby is another crag that
affords a way.

Yesterday, five hours later than now, com
pleted one thousand two hundred and sixtysix years since the road was broken here. I
am sending some of my company that way,
to see if any is out taking the air. Go with
them, for they will not harm you.
Come forward, Alichino and Calcabrina,
he began to say, and you, Cagnazzo; and let
Barbariccia lead the ten. Let Libicocco come
too, and Draghignazzo, and tusked Ciriatto
and Graffiacane and Farfarello and crazy
Rubicante. Search around the boiling glue.
Let these two be safe as far as the next crag
that all unbroken goes across the dens.
O me! master, what is this I see? I said.
Ah, let us go alone without escort, if you
know the way, for, as for myself, I want
none! If you are as wary as you are wont,
do you not see how they grind their teeth
and with their brows threaten harm to us?
And he to me, I would not have you be
afraid; let them grind on as they please, for
they do it at the boiled wretches.
They wheeled round by the bank on the
left, but first each pressed his tongue between
his teeth at their leader for a signal, and he
had made a trumpet of his arse.
CANTO XXII
Ir re
now have I seen horsemen moving
camp, and beginning an assault and making
their muster, and sometimes retiring to es
cape; I have seen coursers over your land, O
Aretines, and I have seen the starting of raids,
the onset of tournaments, and the running of
jousts, now with trumpets and now with
bells, with drums and castle-signals, with
native things and foreignbut never to so
strange a pipe have I seen horsemen or foot
men set forth, or ship by sign of land or star!
We were going along with the ten demons
ah, savage company! but in church with
saints and with guzzlers in the tavern! My
attention was all on the pitch, in order to see
every condition of the pouch, and of the peo
ple who were burning in it.

Like dolphins when with their arching backs
they give sign to mariners that they should
prepare to save their ship, so from time to
time one of the sinners would show his back
to alleviate his pain, and hide it again,
quicker than a lightning-flash. And as at the
edge of the water of a ditch the frogs lie with
only their muzzle out, so that they hide their
feet and the rest of their bulk, so were the
sinners on every side; but as Barbariccia ap
proached, so would they draw back under
the boiling.
I sawand my heart sdii shudders at it
one waiting, just as it happens that one frog
stays and another jumps. And Graffiacane,
who was nearest to him, hooked him by his
pitchy locks, and haled him up so that to me
he seemed an otter. I already knew all their
names, having noted them well when they
were chosen, and then observed what they
called each other.
O Rubicante, see that you set your claws
on him and flay him, shouted all the ac
cursed crew together. And I, Master, pray
learn, if you can, who is the hapless wretch
that has fallen into the hands of his enemies.
My leader drew up to his side, and asked
him whence he came; and he replied, I was
born in the kingdom of Navarre.

My mother placed me as servant of a lord,
for she had borne me to a ribald destroyer of
himself and of his substance. Then I was of
the household of the good King Thibaut
there I set myself to practice barratry, for
which I render reckoning in this heat.
Then Ciriatto, from whose mouth on either
side protruded a tusk, as of a boar, made
him feel how one of them could rip. The
mouse had come among evil cats; but Bar
bariccia locked him in his arms and said,
Stand back while I enfork him, then turned
to my master and said, Ask on, if you would
learn more from him before another mangles
him. .
My leader therefore, Tell us, then of the
other sinners under the pitch, do you know
any who are Italian? And he, I parted just
now from one who was a neighbor of theirs.
Would I were still under cover with him, for
I should not fear claw or hook. And Libicocco cried, We have endured too much!
and seized his arm with the grapple so that,
tearing, he ripped out a muscle of it. Draghignazzo also made as if to hook him in the
legs, at which their captain wheeled round
on them all with an ugly look.
When they were a little quieted, my leader
straightway asked him who was still gazing
at his wound,

Who was that from whom you say you
made an ill departure to come ashore?
And he answered, That was Fra Gomita,
he of Gallura, vessel of every fraud, who had
his masters enemies in his hand, and did so
deal with them that they all praise him for
it. He took the cash and dismissed them
smoothly, as he says; and in his other affairs
too he was no petty barrator, but sovereign.
Don Michel Zanche of Logodoro keeps com
pany with him, and in talking of Sardinia
their tongues are never weary. O me! see
that other one grinding his teeth! I would tell
more, but I fear hes preparing to scratch my
itch. And the great marshal, turning to
Farfarello, who was rolling his eyes to strike,
said, Get back there, villainous bird!
If you would see or hear Tuscans or
Lombards, the frightened one then began
again, I will make some of them come. But
let the Malebranche stand back a bit, so that
they may not fear their vengeance; and I,
sitting in this same place, for one that I am,
will make seven come when I whistle, as is
our custom when any of us gets out.
Cagnazzo at these words raised his muzzle
and said, shaking his head, Hear the cun
ning trick he has contrived to throw himself
down in.

Whereon he, who had artifices in great store,
replied, I am indeed cunning when I con
trive greater sorrow for my companions!
Alichino held in no longer and, in opposition
to the others, said to him, If you plunge, I
wont follow you at a gallop, but Ill beat my
wings above the pitch. Let the ridge be left,
and let the bank be a screen, to see if you
alone are more than a match for us.
Now, reader, you shall hear new sport. All
turned their eyes toward the other side, he
first who had most opposed it. The Navarrese
chose well his time, planted his feet firmly
on the ground, and in an instant leaped and
broke away from their marshal. Thereat each
was stung with his fault, but he most who
was the cause of the blunder; wherefore he
started and cried out, Youre caught! But
it availed him little, for wings could not outspeed the terror the one went under, and the
other, flying, turned his breast upward; not
otherwise the wild duck that suddenly dives
down, when the falcon approaches, and he
returns upward, vexed and defeated. Calcabrina, furious at the trick, went flying after
him, eager for the sinner to escape, so as to
have a scuffle;

and, when the barrator had disappeared, he
turned his claws on his fellow and grappled
with him above the ditch; but the other was
indeed a full-grown hawk to claw him well,
and both fell into the middle of the boiling
pond. The heat at once unclutched them, but
there was no getting out, they had so beglued
their wings. Barbariccia, lamenting with the
rest, made four of them fly to the other bank,
each with his fork; and very quickly, on this
side and on that, they descended to their
posts and stretched their hooks toward the
belimed
ones,
who
were
already
cooked
within their crust; and we left them thus
embroiled.
CANTO XXIII
Silent, alone, without escort, we went on,
one before and the other behind, as Friars
Minor go their way. My thought was turned
by the present brawl on the fable of Aesop
where he told of the frog and the mouse; for
Ay and Yea are not more alike than the one
case is to the other, if we compare the begin
ning and the end attentively. And just as one
thought springs from another, so from that
another was born which redoubled my first
fear. I thought they have been fooled be
cause of us, and with such hurt and mockery
as I believe must vex them greatly. If rage
be added to their malice, they will come after
us, fiercer than the dog to the leveret he
snaps up.

Already I felt my hair all bristling with fear
as I went along intent on what was behind
us, and I said, Master, unless you quickly
hide yourself and me, I dread the Malebranche. We have them after us already I
so imagine them that I hear them now.
And he, If I were of leaded glass, I should
not draw to me your outward semblance more
quickly than I receive your inward. Even
now came your thoughts among mine, with
like action and like look, so that of both I
have made one counsel. If it be that the slope
on the right lies so that we can descend into
the next ditch, we shall escape the imagined
chase.
He had not yet finished telling me his plan
when I saw them coming with outstretched
wings, not very far off, bent on taking us.
My leader instantly took me up, like a
mother who is awakened by the noise and
sees
beside
her
the
kindled
flames,
and
catches up her child and flies, and, more con
cerned for him than for herself, does not stay
even to put on a shift; and, down from the
ridge of the hard bank he gave himself supine
to the sloping rock that closes one side of the
next pouch. Never did water run so fast
through a sluice to turn the wheel of a landmill when it approaches nearest to the paddles,

as my master went down that bank, carrying
me along upon his breast, not as his com
panion but as his child. Scarcely had his feet
reached the bed of the depth below when
they were on the height directly over us; but
there was nothing to fear, for the high Provi
dence which willed to set them as ministers
of the fifth ditch deprives them all of power
to leave it.
There below we found a painted people
who were going round with very slow steps,
weeping and in their looks tired and over
come. They wore cloaks with cowls down
over their eyes, of the cut that is made for
the monks of Cluny, so gilded outside that
they dazzle, but within, all of lead, and so
heavy that those Frederick imposed were of
straw. O toilsome mantle for eternity!
We turned, ever to the left, along with
them, intent on their dreary weeping. But,
because of the load, that tired folk came on
so slowly that our company was new at every
step we took; wherefore I said to my guide,
Pray find someone who may be known by
deed or name, looking round as we go. And
one who caught the Tuscan speech cried after
us, Stay your steps, you who run thus
through the dusky air!

Perhaps you shall obtain from me what you
ask. At which my leader turned to me and
said, Wait, and then proceed at his pace. I
stopped, and saw two show by their look
great haste of mind to be with me, but their
load and the narrow way retarded them.
When they came up, with eye askance they
gazed at me awhile without uttering a word;
then, turning to each other, they said, This
man seems alive, by the action of his throat;
and if they are dead, by what privilege do
they go divested of the heavy stole? Then
they said to me, O Tuscan, who are come
to the assembly of the sad hypocrites, do not
disdain to tell us who you are.
And I to them, I was born and grew up
on the fair stream of Arno, at the great town,
and I am in the body that I have always had;
but you, who are you, down whose cheeks
distils such woe as I see? And what penalty
is this upon you that glitters so? And one
of them replied to me, The orange cloaks
are of lead so thick that the weight thus
causes their scales to creak. We were Jovial
Friars, and Bolognese I named Catalano,
and he Loderingo, and by your city chosen
together, as one man alone is usually chosen,
to maintain the peace; and we were such,
that it still appears around the Gardingo.

I began, O Friars, your evil . . .but
said no more, for there caught my eye one
crucified on the ground with three stakes.
When he saw me he writhed all over, blow
ing in his beard with sighs; and Fra Catalano,
observing this, said to me, That transfixed
one you are gazing at counseled the Pharisees
that it was expedient to put one man to
torture for the people. He is stretched out
naked across the way, as you see, and needs
must feel the weight of each that passes; and
in like fashion is his father-in-law racked in
this ditch, and the others of that council
which was a seed of evil for the Jews. Then
I saw Virgil wonder over him who was thus
outstretched, as on a cross, so vilely in the
eternal exile. Then he directed his words to
the friar, May it not displease you, if it be
permitted, to tell us if there lies any passage
on the right by which we two can get out of
here, without requiring some of the black
angels to come
to
deliver
us from this
bottom.
He then replied, Nearer than you hope
is a ridge of rock that starts from the great
encircling wall and spans all the savage val
leys, save that at this one it is broken down
and does not cover it; you will be able to
mount up by the ruin that lies against the
side and piles up at the bottom.

My leader stood for a moment with bowed
head, then said, He that hooks the sinners
back yonder gave a poor account of the mat
ter. And the friar, At Bologna once I heard
it said that the devil has many vices, among
which I heard that he is a liar and the father
of lies.
Then my guide went on with great strides,
somewhat disturbed with anger in his look;
and I departed from those burdened souls,
following the prints of the beloved feet.
CANTO XXIV
In that part of the youthful year when the
sun tempers his locks beneath Aquarius, and
the nights already wane towards half the
day, when the hoarfrost copies on the ground
the image of his white sister, but the temper
of his pen lasts but short whilethe peasant,
whose fodder fails, rises and looks out and
sees the fields all white; at which he smites
his thigh, returns indoors and grumbles to
and fro, like the poor wretch who knows not
what to do; then comes out again and recovers
hope when he sees how in but little time the
world has changed its face, and taking his
crook, drives forth his sheep to pasture. Thus
my master caused me dismay when I saw
his brow so troubled, and thus quickly came
the plaster to the hurt.
For when we came to the ruined bridge my
leader turned to me with that sweet look
which I saw first at the foot of the mountain.
After taking some counsel with himself, look
ing first well at the ruin, he opened his arms
and laid hold of me. And like one who works
and reckons, always seeming to provide be
forehand, so, while lifting me up toward the
top of one great rock, he was looking out
another crag, saying, Grapple next on that,
but try first if it will bear you. It was no
road for anyone wearing the mantle, for we
he light and I pushed oncould scarcely
mount from jag to jag. And had it not been
that on that dike the slope was shorter than
on the other, I know not about him, but I
should have been quite vanquished. But be
cause all Malebolge inclines toward the mouth
of the nethermost well, the site of each valley
is such that one side is higher and the other
lower. We, however, came at length to the
point where the last stone is broken off. The
breath was so spent from my lungs, when I
was up, that I could go no farther, but sat
down as soon as I got there.
Now it behooves you thus to cast off
sloth, said my master, for sitting on down
or under coverlet, no one comes to fame,

without which whoso consumes his life leaves
such vestige of himself on earth as smoke in
air or foam on water. Rise, therefore; conquer
your panting with the soul that vvins every
battle, if with its heavy body it sinks not
down. A longer ladder must be climbed; it
is not enough to have left these spirits. If
you understand me, now act that it may
profit you. I then rose, showing myself
better furnished with breath than I felt, and
said, Go on, for I am strong and resolute.
We took the way up the ridge, which was
rugged, narrow, and difficult, and far steeper
than the last; and I talked as I went, so as
not to seem exhausted, when a voice, ill-suited
for forming words, came out from the next
ditch. I do not know what it said, though I
was already on the crown of the arch that
crosses there, but he who was speaking seemed
to be moving. I had turned my eyes down
ward, but because of the darkness my keen
gaze could not reach the bottom; wherefore
I said, Master, pray go on to the next belt,
and let us descend the wall, for from this
point not only do I hear without under
standing, but I look down and make out
nothing.
Other reply, he said, I do not give
you than the doing, for a fit request should
be followed by the deed in silence.

We descended at the end of the bridge
where it joins the eighth bank, and then the
ditch was manifest to me I saw within it a
fearful throng of serpents, of kinds so strange
that the memory of it still chills my blood.
Let Libya with her sands vaunt herself no
more! for though she bring forth chelydri,
j acuii, and phareae, and cenchres with amphisbaena, she never, with all Ethiopia, nor with
the land that lies on the Red Sea, showed
plagues so numerous or malignant. Amid this
cruel and most dismal swarm were people
running naked and terrified, without hope of
hiding-place or heliotrope. They had their
hands bound behind with serpents these
thrust through their loins the head and tail,
which were knotted in front.
And lo! at one who was near our bank
darted a serpent that transfixed him there
where the neck is joined to the shoulders, and
never was or written so fast as he took
fire and burned, and must sink down all
turned to ashes; and when he was thus
destroyed on the ground, the dust drew to
gether of itself and at once resumed the
former shape; thus by great sages it is af
firmed that the Phoenix dies and is born
again when it approaches its five-hundredth
year.

In its life it feeds not on herb or grain, but
only on tears of incense and amomum; and
nard and myrrh are its last winding-sheet.
And as one who falls and knows not how,
by force of some devil dragging him to the
ground, or by some other obstruction that
binds a man, who, when he rises, stares about
him, all bewildered by the great anguish he
has suffered and, looking, sighs such was
that sinner when he rose.
Oh power of God! how severe it is, that
showers down such blows for vengeance!
My leader then asked him who he was; to
which he
answered,
Short while ago I
rained down from Tuscany into this fierce
gullet. A bestial life, not human, pleased me,
mule that I was. I am Vanni Fucci, beast,
and Pistoia was my fitting den. And I to
my leader, Tell him not to slip away, and
ask what sin thrust him down here, for I
have seen him a man of blood and rage.
And the sinner, who heard, did not dissemble,
but directed toward me his mind and look,
and colored with dismal shame, then said,
It grieves me more that you have caught
me in the misery where you see me than
when I was taken from the other life. I can
not refuse you what you ask. I am put down
so far because I was a thief in the sacristy
of the fair adornments

a deed that was once falsely put upon an
other. But that you may not rejoice in this
sight, if ever you escape from these dark
regions, open your ears and hear what I an
nounce Pistoia first strips herself of Blacks;
then Florence renews her people and her
ways. Mars draws a vapor from Val di Magra
which is wrapt in turbid clouds, and with
impetuous and bitter storm there shall be
fighting on Campo Piceno, whence suddenly
it shall rend the mist, so that every White
shall be struck by it. And I have said this
that it may grieve you.
CANTO XXV
lT the
end of his words the thief raised
up his hands with both the figs, crying, Take
them, God, for I aim them at you! From
this time forth the serpents were my friends,
for one then coiled itself about his neck, as
if it said, You shall say no more, and an
other about his arms and bound him again,
so riveting itself in front that he could not
give a jog with them.
Ah, Pistoia, Pistoia! why do you not decree
to turn yourself to ashes and to last no
longer, since you surpass your own seed in
evil-doing? Through all the dark circles of
Hell I saw no spirit so proud against God,
not him who fell from the walls at Thebes.
He fled, speaking no more; and I saw a
centaur full of rage come shouting, Where
is he, where is the unripe one?
Maremma, I do believe, has not so many
snakes as he upon his croup up to where our
form begins; and on his shoulders behind
the nape lay a dragon with outstretched wings
that sets on fire whomever it encounters. My
master said, That is Cacus, who beneath the
rock of Mount Aventine full often made a
lake of blood. He goes not with his brothers
on one same road, because of the cunning
theft he made of the great herd that lay near
him; and for this his crooked ways were
ended under the club of Hercules, who
dealt him perhaps a hundred blows and he
felt not ten of them.
While he thus spoke, the centaur ran past,
and there came below us three spirits whom
neither I nor my guide perceived till they
cried out, Who are you? whereon we broke
off our talk and gave heed to them alone.
I did not know them; but it happened, as
often happens by some chance, that one had
occasion to name another, saying, Where
can Cianfa be? Wherefore, in order that my
leader might remain attentive, I placed my
finger upwards from my chin to my nose.
If, reader, you are now slow to credit that
which I shall tell, it will be no wonder, for I
who saw it do scarcely admit it to myself.

While I kept my eyes on them, lo! a ser
pent with six feet darts up in front of one
and fastens on him all over. With the middle
feet it clasped the belly, and with its fore
feet took his arms, then struck its teeth in
one and the other cheek; its hind feet it
spread upon his thighs, and put its tail be
tween them, and bent it upwards on his
loins behind. Ivy was never so rooted to a
tree as the horrid beast entwined its own
limbs round the others; then, as if they had
been of hot wax, they stuck together and
mixed their colors, and neither the one nor
the other now seemed what it was at first
even as in advance of the flame a dark color
moves across the paper, which is not yet black
and the white dies away. The other two
were looking on, and each cried, Oh me,
Agnello, how you change! Lo, you are al
ready neither two nor one!
Now the two heads had become one, when
we saw the two shapes mixed in one face,
where both were lost. Two arms were made
of the four lengths; the thighs with the
legs, the belly and the chest, became members
that were never seen before. Each former
feature was blotted out the perverse image
seemed both and neither, and such, with
slow pace, it moved away.

As the lizard under the great scourge of the
dog days, darting from hedge to hedge, seems
a lightning-flash, if it cross the way, so ap
peared, making for the bellies of the other
two, a small fiery serpent, livid and black as
a peppercorn; and it transfixed in one of
them that part by which we first receive our
nourishment, then fell down before him,
stretched out. The transfixed one gazed at it,
but said nothing, only standing there yawn
ing as if sleep or fever had come upon him.
He eyed the reptile, the reptile him; the one
from his wound, the other from its mouth,
smoked violently, and their smoke met.
Let Lucan now be silent, where he tells of
the wretched Sabellus and of Nasidius, and
let him wait to hear what now comes forth.
Concerning Cadmus and Arethusa let Ovid
be silent, for if he, poetizing, converts the one
into a serpent and the other into a fountain,
I envy him not; for two natures front to front
he never so transmuted that both forms were
prompt to exchange their substance. They
mutually responded in such a way that the
reptile cleft its tail into a fork, and the
wounded one drew his feet together. The legs
and thighs so stuck together that soon no
mark of the juncture could be seen;

the cloven tail took on the shape that was
lost in the other; and its skin grew soft, the
others hard. I saw the arms drawing in at
the armpits, and the brutes two feet, which
were short, lengthening out in proportion as
the others arms were shortening. Then the
hind
paws,
twisted
together, became the
member that man conceals, and from his
the wretch had put forth two feet. While the
smoke veils the one and the other with a
new color, and generates hair on the one part
and strips it from the other, the one rose up
right and the other fell down, but neither
turned aside the baleful lamps beneath which
each was changing his muzzle. He that was
erect drew his in toward the temples, and
from the excess of matter that came in there
the ears issued from the smooth cheeks; that
which did not run back, but was retained,
made of that excess a nose for the face and
thickened the lips to due size. He that lay
prone drives the snout forward and draws
the ears back into the head as the snail does
its horns; and the tongue, which before was
whole and fit for speech, divides, and in the
other the forked tongue joins up; and the
smoke stops. The soul that was become a
brute flees hissing along the valley; and the
other, speaking, spits after it.
-
Then he turned on it his new shoulders, and
said to the third, Ill have Buoso run on all
fours along this road, as I have done!
Thus I saw the seventh ballast change and
transmuteand here let the novelty be my
excuse, if my pen goes aught astray. And
though my eyes were somewhat confused
and my mind bewildered, these could not
flee so covertly but that I clearly distin
guished Puccio Sciancato, and it was he
alone, of the three companions that came
first, who was not changed; the other was
he whom you, Gaville, lament.
CANTO XXVI
I.ejoice, O Florence, since you are so great
that over sea and land you beat your wings,
and your name is spread through Hell!
Among the thieves I found five of your citi
zens, such that shame comes to meand you
rise thereby to no great honor. But if near
morning our dreams are true, you shall feel
ere long what Prato, as well as others, craves
for you. And if it were already come, it would
not be too soon. Would it were, since indeed
it must, for it will weigh the more on me the
more I age.
We departed thence, and by the stairs
which the jutting rocks had made for our
descent before, my leader remounted and
drew me up; and pursuing the solitary way
among the jags and rocks of the ridge, the
foot could not advance without the hand.
sorrowed then, and sorrow now again,
when I turn my mind to what I saw; and
I curb my genius more than I am wont, lest
it run where virtue does not guide it; so that,
if a kindly star or something better has
granted me the good, I may not grudge my
self that gift.
As many as the fireflies which the peasant,
resting on the hillin the season when he
that lights the world least hides his face from
us, and at the hour when the fly yields to
the mosquitosees down along the valley,
there perhaps where he gathers the grapes
and tills with so many flames the eighth
ditch was all agleam, as I perceived as soon
as I came where the bottom could be seen.
And as he who was avenged by the bears
saw Elijahs chariot at its departure, when
the horses rose erect to heavenfor he could
not so follow it with his eyes as to see aught
save the flame alone, like a little cloud ascend
ing so each flame moves along the gullet of
the ditch, for not one shows its theft, and
each steals away a sinner.
I was standing on the bridge, having risen
up to see, so that if I had not laid hold of a
rock I should have fallen below without a
push; and my leader, who saw me so intent,
said, Within the fires are the spirits each
swathes himself with that which burns him.

Master, I replied, I am the more cer
tain for hearing you, but already I thought
it was so, and already I wanted to ask who is
in that fire which comes so divided at its top
that it seems to rise from the pyre where
Eteocles was laid with his brother?
He answered me, Therewithin are tor
mented Ulysses and Diomedes, and they go
together thus under the vengeance as once
under the wrath; and in their flame they
groan for the ambush of the horse which
made the gate by which the noble seed of
the Romans went forth; within it they la
ment the craft, because of which the dead
Deidamia still mourns Achilles, and there
for the Palladium they bear the penalty.
If they can speak within those sparks, I
said, master, I earnestly pray you, and pray
again, that my prayer avail a thousand, that
you deny me not to wait until the horned
flame comes hither you see how with desire
I bend towards it.
And he to me, Your prayer deserves much
praise and therefore I accept it; but do you
restrain your tongue leave speech to me, for
I have understood what you wishand per
haps, since they were Greeks, they would be
disdainful of your words.
After the flame had come where it seemed
to my leader the time and place, I heard him
speak in this manner

O you who are two within one fire, if I
deserved of you while I lived, if I deserved of
you much or little when in the world I
wrote the lofty lines, move not; but let the
one of you tell where he went, lost, to die.
The greater horn of the ancient flame began
to wag, murmuring, like one that is beaten by
a wind; then carrying to and fro its tip, as
if it were a tongue that spoke, it flung forth
a voice and said, When I departed from
Circe, who had detained me more than a
year there near Gaeta, before Aeneas had so
named it, neither fondness for my son, nor
reverence for my aged father, nor the due love
which would have made Penelope glad, could
conquer in me the longing that I had to gain
experience of the world, and of human vice
and worth. But I put forth on the deep open
sea with one vessel only, and with that small
company which had not deserted me. The
one shore and the other I saw as far as Spain,
as far as Morocco, and Sardinia, and the
other islands which that sea bathes round. I
and my companions were old and slow when
we came to that narrow outlet where Her
cules set up his markers,

that men should not pass beyond. On the
right hand I left Seville, on the other I had
already left Ceuta. O brothers, I said, who
through a hundred thousand dangers have
reached the west, to this so brief vigil of our
senses that remains to us, choose not to deny
experience, following the sun, of the world
that has no people. Consider your origin you
were not made to live as brutes, but to pur
sue virtue and knowledge.
With this little speech I made my com
panions so keen for the voyage that then I
could hardly have held them back. And turn
ing our stern to the morning, we made of
our oars wings for the mad flight, always
gaining on the left. The night now saw the
other pole and all its stars, and ours so low
that it did not rise from the ocean floor. Five
times the light beneath the moon had been
rekindled and as many quenched, since we
had entered on the passage of the deep, when
there appeared to us a mountain dark in the
distance, and to me it seemed the highest I
had ever seen. We rejoiced, but soon our joy
was turned to grief, for from the new land a
whirlwind rose and struck the forepart of
the ship.

Three times it whirled her round with all the
waters, and the fourth time it lifted the stern
aloft and plunged the prow below, as pleased
Another, till the sea closed over us.
CANTO XXVII
te flame was already erect and quiet,
having ceased to speak, and, with the consent
of the gentle poet, now went away from us,
when another that came on behind it made
us turn our eyes to its tip for a confused
sound that came from it. As the Sicilian bull
which bellowed first with the cry of him
and that was rightwho had shaped it with
his file was wont to bellow with the voice
of the victim, so that, though it was of brass,
yet it seemed transfixed with pain thus, hav
ing at first no course or outlet in the fire,
the doleful words were changed into its lan
guage. But after they had found their way up
through the tip, giving it the same vibration
that the tongue had given in their passage,

we heard it say, O you to whom I direct my
voice and who just now spoke Lombard,
saying, Now go your way, I do not urge you
more, although I have come perhaps some
what late, let it not irk you to stop and speak
with me you see it irks not me, and I am
burning. If you are but now fallen into this
blind world from that sweet land of Italy
whence I bring all my guilt, tell me if the
Romagnoles have peace or war; for I was of
the mountains there between Urbino and the
chain from which the Tiber springs.
I was still bent down and intent when my
leader touched me on the side and said, You
speak he is Italian. And I, who was already
prepared to answer, began without delay, O
soul that are hidden down there, your Ro
magna is not, nor ever was, without war in
the hearts of her tyrants; but no open war
have I left there now. Ravenna is as it has
been for many a year the eagle of Polenta
broods over it so that he covers Cervia with
his wings. The city that once bore the long
siege and made of the French a bloody heap,
finds itself again under the green claws. And
the old mastiff and the new of Verrucchio,
who made the ill disposal of Montagna, ply
their teeth where they are wont.

The cities on Lamone and Santerno are
ruled by the young lion of the white lair, who
changes side from summer to winter. And
that city whose flank the Savio bathes, even
as it lies between the plain and the moun
tain, so does it live between tyranny and
freedom. Now I pray you tell us who you
are; be not more grudging than another has
been to you, so may your name endure in the
world!
After the flame had roared for a while in
its own fashion, the sharp point moved to
and fro, and then gave forth this breath, If
I thought that my answer were to one who
might ever return to the world, this flame
would shake no more; but since from this
depth none ever returned alive, if what I
hear is true, I answer you without fear of
infamy.
I was a man of arms, and then a corded
friar, trusting, so girt, to make amends; and
certainly my hope would have come full, but
for the High Priestmay ill befall him!
who set me back in my first sins and how
and wherefore I would have you hear from
me. While I was the form of the flesh and
bones my mother gave me, my deeds were
not those of the lion, but of the fox. I knew
all wiles and covert ways, and plied the art
of them so well that to the ends of the earth
their sound went forth.

When I saw myself come to that part of my
life when every man should lower the sails
and coil up the ropes, that which before had
pleased me grieved me then, and with re
pentance and confession I turned friar, and
woe is me!it would have availed.
The Prince of the new Pharisees, having
war near the Lateranand not with Saracens
or with Jews, for his every enemy was Chris
tian, and none had been to conquer Acre, nor
been a merchant in the Soldans landre
garded neither the supreme office and holy
orders in himself, nor, in me, that cord which
used to make its wearers leaner; but as Con
stantine sought out Sylvester within Soracte
to cure his leprosy, so this one sought me out
as the doctor to cure the fever of his pride.
He asked counsel of me, and I kept silent, for
his words seemed drunken. Then he spoke
again, Let not your heart mistrust. I absolve
you here and now, and do you teach me how
I may cast Penestrino to the ground. I can
lock and unlock Heaven, as you know; for
the keys are two, which my predecessor did
not hold dear. Thereon the weighty argu
ments pushed me to where silence seemed to
me the worst, and I said, Father, since you
do wash me of that sin

into which I now must fall, long promise
with short keeping will make you triumph
on the High Seat.
Then, when I died, Francis came for me;
but one of the black Cherubim said to him,
Do not take him, wrong me not! He must
come down among my minions because he
gave the fraudulent counsel, since which till
now I have been at his hair; for he who re
pents not cannot be absolved, nor is it pos
sible to repent of a thing and to will it at the
same time, for the contradiction does not
allow it.
O wretched me! how I started when he
seized me, saying, Perhaps you did not think
that I was a logician! He bore me to Minos,
who coiled his tail eight times round his
rough back, and then, biting it in great rage,
said, This is a sinner for the thievish fire;
wherefore here where you see me I am lost,
and go, thus robed, in bitterness.
When he had thus ended his words the
sorrowing flame departed, twisting and toss
ing the pointed horn.
We passed onward, I and my guide, along
the reef as far as the next arch which spans
the ditch where they pay the fee who acquire
their load by sundering.
CANTO XXVIII
Who could ever fully tell, even in un
fettered words, though many times narrating,
the blood and the wounds that I now saw?
Surely every tongue would fail, because of
our speech and our memory which have little
capacity to comprehend so much.
Were all the people assembled again who
once in the fateful land of Apulia bewailed
their blood shed by the Trojans, and those
of the long war that made so vast a spoil of
ringsas Livy writes, who does not err
together with those who felt the pain of
blows in the struggle with Robert Guiscard,
and those others whose bones are still heaped
up at Ceperano, where every Apulian was
false, and there by Tagliacozzo where old
Alar do conquered without arms;

and
one
should
show
his
-
limb
pierced
through, and another his cut off, it would be
nothing to equal the foul fashion of the ninth
pouch.
Truly a cask, through loss of mid-board or
side-piece, gapes not so wide as one I saw,
cleft from the chin to the part that breaks
wind; his entrails were hanging between his
legs, and the vitals could be seen and the foul
sack that makes ordure of what is swallowed.
While I was all absorbed in gazing on him,
he looked at me and with his hands pulled
open his breast, saying, Now see how I
rend myself, see how mangled is Mohammed!
In front of me goes Ali weeping, cleft in the
face from chin to forelock; and all the others
whom you see here were in their lifetime
sowers of scandal and of schism, and there
fore are thus cleft. A devil is here behind that
fashions us thus cruelly, putting again to the
edge of the sword each of this throng when
we have circled the doleful road; for the
wounds are closed up before any of us pass
again before him. But who are you that are
musing on the ridge, perhaps to delay going
to the punishment pronounced on your own
accusations?
Neither has death yet reached him, nor
does guilt bring him for torment, replied my
master, but in order to give him full ex
perience,

it behooves me, who am dead, to lead him
down here through Hell from circle to circle;
and this is as true as that I speak to you.
More than a hundred there were who,
when they heard him, stopped in the ditch
to look at me, forgetting their torment in
their wonder.
Tell Fra Dolcino, then, you who perhaps
will see the sun before long, if he would not
soon follow me here, so to arm himself with
victuals that stress of snow may not bring
victory to the Novarese, which otherwise
would not be easy to attain.
After he had raised one foot to go on,
Mohammed said this to me, then set it on
the ground to depart.
Another who had his throat pierced through
and his nose cut off up to the eyebrows, and
only one ear left, stopped with the rest to
gaze in astonishment, and before the others
opened his gullet, which was all red outside,
and said, O you whom guilt does not con
demn and whom I saw above in the land of
Italy, if too great likeness does not deceive
me, if ever you return to see the sweet plain
that slopes from Vercelli to Marcab, remem
ber Pier da Medicina. And make it known to
the two best men of Fano, to messer Guido
and to Angiolello, that unless our foresight
here is vain,

they will be thrown out of their vessel and
sunk near La Cattolica, through the treachery
of a fell tyrant. Between the islands of Cyprus
and Majorca Neptune never saw so great a
crime, not of the pirates nor of the Argolic
people. That traitor who sees with but one
eye, and holds the city from sight of which
one who is here with me would wish he had
fasted, will make them come to parley with
him, then will so deal with them that for
the wind of Focara they will not need vow
or prayer.
And I to him, Show me and explain, if
you would have me carry news of you above,
who he is to whom that sight was bitter.
Then he laid hold of the jaw of one of his
companions and opened the mouth, saying,
This is he, and he does not speak being
banished, he quenched the doubt in Caesar,
affirming that to a man prepared delay was
always harmful. Ah, how aghast appeared
to me, with tongue cut off in his throat, Curio
who was so daring in his speech!
And one who had both hands lopped off,
raising the stumps through the murky air so
that the blood befouled his face, cried, You
will recall Mosca too who said, alas! A thing
done has an end! which was seed of ill to
the Tuscan people

and death to your own stock, I added
then; whereat he, heaping sorrow on sorrow,
went off as one crazed with grief.
But I stayed to view the troop, and saw a
thing that I should be afraid even to relate
without more proof, but that conscience, the
good companion that emboldens a man under
the hauberk of feeling itself pure, reassures
me. Truly I saw, and seem to see it still, a
trunk without the head going along as were
the others of that dismal herd, and it was
holding the severed head by the hair, swing
ing it in hand like a lantern, and it was
gazing at us and saying O me! Of itself
it was making a lamp for itself, and they
were two in one and one in twohow this
can be, He knows who so ordains. When he
was right at the foot of the bridge he raised
high his arm with the head, in order to
bring near to us his words, which were, See
now my grievous penalty, you who, breathing,
go to view the dead see if any other is so
great as this! And that you may carry news
of me, know that I am Bertran de Born, he
who to the young king gave the evil counsels.
I made the father and the son rebel against
each other. Ahithophel did not more with
Absalom and David by his wicked instiga
tions.

Because I parted persons thus united, I carry
my brain parted from its source, alas! which
is in this trunk. Thus is the retribution
observed in me.
CANTO XXIX
he
many people and the strange wounds
had made my eyes so drunken that they
longed to stay and weep; but Virgil said to
me, What are you still gazing at? Why
does your sight still rest down there among
the dismal mutilated shades? You have not
done so at the other pits. Consider, if you
think to count them, that the valley circles
two and twenty miles; and already the moon
is beneath our feet. The time is now short
that is allowed us, and there is more to see
than you see here.
If you had given heed to my reason for
looking, I
answered then, perhaps you
would have granted me a longer stay.
Meanwhile my leader was going on, and I
was following after him, making my reply,
and adding, Within that hollow where I
was but now holding my eyes so fixedly, I
believe a spirit of my own blood laments the
guilt that costs so dear down there.

Then said the master, Do not let your
thought distract itself on him henceforth;
attend to somewhat else, and let him stay
there; for I saw him there below the bridge
point at you and fiercely threaten with his
finger, and I heard them call him Geri del
Bello. You were then so wholly occupied with
him who once held Hautefort that you did
not look that way till he was gone.
O my leader, I said, the violent death
which is not yet avenged for him by any who
is partner in the shame made him indignant;
wherefore, as I judge, he went on without
speaking to me, and thereby has he made me
pity him the more
Thus we spoke, up to the first place on
the crag which shows the next valley, had
there been more light, right to the bottom.
When we were above the last cloister of
Malebolge, so that its lay brothers could be
seen by us, strange lamentations assailed me
which had their shafts barbed with pity; at
which I covered my ears with my hands.
Such suffering as there would be if, between
July and September, the sick from the hos
pitals of Valdichiana and of Maremma and
of Sardinia were all in one ditch together,
such was there here; and such a stench issued
thence as is wont to come from festered limbs.

We descended onto the last bank of the long
crag, keeping ever to the left, and then my
sight was clearer down into the depth, where
the ministress of the High Lord, infallible
Justice, punishes the falsifiers whom she reg
isters here.
I do not believe it was a greater sorrow to
see the whole people in Aegina sick, when the
air was so full of corruption that every ani
mal, even to the little worm, fell dead, and
afterwards, as the poets hold for certain, the
ancient peoples were restored from seed of
ants, than it was to see, through that dark
valley, the spirits languishing in divers heaps.
One lay on his belly, one lay on the shoulders
of another, and one shifted on all fours along
the dismal way. Step by step we went in
silence, watching and listening to the sick,
who were unable to raise themselves.
I saw two sitting propped against each
other, as pan is leaned against pan to warm,
spotted from head to foot with scabs; and
never did I see currycomb plied by stableboy whose master waits for him, nor by one
who unwillingly stays awake, as each of these
plied thick the clawing of his nails upon
himself, for the great fury of the itch which
has no other succor;
-
and the nails were dragging down the scab,
as a knife does the scales of bream or of
other fish that has them larger.
O you who with your fingers dismail
yourself, my leader began to one of them,
and who sometimes make pincers of them,
tell us if there is any Italian among these
who are here within, so may your nails suffice
you eternally in this work.
We are Italians, both of us, whom you
see so disfigured here, replied the one, weep
ing, but who are you that inquire of us?
And my leader said, I am one who with
this living man descend from ledge to ledge,
and I mean to show him Hell.
Then their mutual support was broken,
and each turned toward me trembling, with
others who overheard him. The good master
drew quite close to me, saying, Tell them
what you will. And I began, as he desired,
So may memory of you in the first world
not fade away from the minds of men, but
may it live under many suns, tell me who
you are and of what people; let not your
ugly and disgusting punishment make you
fear to declare yourselves to me.
I was of Arezzo, one of them replied,
and Albero of Siena had me burned; but
what I died for does not bring me here.

True it is, I said to him, speaking in jest,
I would know how to raise myself through
the air in flight; and he, who had a lively
desire and little wit, would have me show him
the art; and only because I did not make
him a Daedalus, he had me burned by one
who held him as a son. But, for the alchemy
I practiced in the world, Minos, to whom it
is not allowed to err, condemned me to this
last pouch of the ten.
And I said to the poet, Now was ever a
people so vain as the Sienese? Surely not so
the French by far.
Whereat the other leper, who heard me,
responded to my words, Except for Stricca,
who knew how to spend in moderation; and
except for Niccol, who first devised the
costly use of the clove, in the garden where
such seed takes root; and except for the com
pany in which Caccia dAsciano squandered
the vineyard and the great purse, and Ab
bagliato showed his wit. But, that you may
know who thus seconds you against the
Sienese, sharpen your eye toward me, that
my face may answer well to you, and you
will see that I am the shade of Capocchio,
who falsified the metals by alchemy; and you
must recall, if I rightly eye you, how good an
ape of nature I was.
T
CANTO XXX
In
the
time when Juno was wroth for
Semele against the Theban blood, as she
showed more than once, Athamas became so
insane that, seeing his wife go carrying their
two children on either hand, he cried, Let
us spread the nets to take the lioness and the
whelps at the pass! and then stretched out
his pitiless claws, grasping the one that was
named Learchus, and whirled him round and
dashed him on a rock; and she drowned her
self with her other burden. And when For
tune brought low the all-daring pride of the
Trojans, so that the king together with his
kingdom
was
blotted
out,
Hecuba,
sad,
wretched and captive, after she had seen
Polyxena slain and, forlorn, discerned her
Polydorus on the sea-strand,

she, driven mad, barked like a dog, so had
the sorrow wrung her soul. But no fury of
Thebes or of Troy was ever seen so cruel
against any, in rending beasts, much less
human limbs, as were two pallid shades that
I saw biting and running like the pig when
it is let out of the sty. The one came at
Capocchio and fixed its tusks on his neckjoint, so that, dragging him, it made his
belly scratch along the solid bottom. And the
Aretine, who was left, trembling said to me,
That goblin is Gianni Schicchi, and he goes
rabid mangling others thus.
Oh, said I to him, so may the other not
fix its teeth on you, be pleased to tell who it
is, before it breaks away from here.
And he to me, That is the ancient spirit
of infamous Myrrha, who became loving of
her father beyond rightful love. She came
to sin with him by falsifying herself in an
others form, even as the other, who goes off
there, ventured, that he might gain the lady
of the herd, to counterfeit in himself Buoso
Donati, making a will and giving it due
form.
And when the furious two on whom I had
kept my eyes had passed on, I turned to look
at the other ill-born shades, and

I saw one shaped like a lute, if only he had
been cut short at the groin from the part
where a man is forked. The heavy dropsy
which, with its ill-digested humor, so un
mates the members that the face does not
answer to the paunch, made him hold his
lips apart, like the hectic who, for thirst,
curls the one lip toward his chin and the
other upwards.
Oh you who are without any punishment,
and I know not why, in this dismal world,
he said to us, behold and consider the misery
of Master Adam. Living, I had in plenty all
that I wished, and now, alas! I crave one drop
of water! The little brooks that from the
green hills of Casentino run down into the
Arno, making their channels cool and moist,
are always before me, and not in vain, for
the image of them parches me far more than
the malady that wastes my features. The rigid
justice that scourges me draws occasion from
the place where I sinned, to give my sighs a
quicker flight; there is Romena, where I
falsified the currency stamped with the Bap
tist, for which on earth I left my body burnt.
But if I could see here the miserable soul of
Guido or of Alessandro or of their brother,
I would not give the sight for Fonte Branda.

One of them is here within already, if the
raging shades who go around speak true; but
what does it avail me whose limbs are tied.
If I were only still so light that I could move
one inch in a hundred years, I would have set
out already on the road to seek him among
this disfigured people, for all it is eleven
miles around and not less than half a mile
across. Because of them am I in such a family
they induced me to strike the florins that had
three carats of alloy.
And I to him, Who are the two wretches
that are smoking like wet hands in winter,
lying close to your confines on the right?
Here I found them when I rained down
into this trough, he answered, and since
then they have not given a turn, nor do I
think they will, to all eternity. The one is the
false woman who accused Joseph; the other
is the false Sinon, Greek from Troy. Burning
fever makes them reek so strongly.
And one of them, who took offense per
haps at being named so darkly, with his
fist struck him on his stiff paunch; it sounded
like a drum; and Master Adam struck him
in the face with his arm, which seemed no
less hard, saying to him, Though I am kept
from moving, by the weight of my limbs,
which are heavy, I have an arm free for such
a need.

To which he replied, When you were
going to the fire you didnt have it thus ready;
but you did have it as ready, and more, when
you were coining.
And the dropsied one, You speak the truth
in this; but you were not so true a witness
there at Troy where you were questioned
about the truth.
If I spoke falsely, you falsified the coin,
said Sinon, and I am here for a single sin,
and you for more than any other demon.
Remember, perjurer, the horse, he of the
swollen paunch replied, and may it torture
you that all the world knows of it.
And to you be torture the thirst that
cracks your tongue, said the Greek, and
the foul water that makes your belly thus a
hedge before your eyes.
Then the coiner, Thus for fever your jaws
gape wide, as usual; for if I have thirst and
if humor stuffs me, you have the burning and
an aching head, and to lick the mirror of
Narcissus you would not want many words of
invitation.
I was standing all intent to listen to them,
when the master said to me, Now just you
keep on looking a little more and I will
quarrel with you!
When I heard him speak to me in anger,
I turned to him with such shame that it
circles through my memory even yet.

And as is he who dreams of something hurt
ful to him and, dreaming, wishes that it were
a dream, so that he longs for that which is,
as if it were not, such I became that, unable
to speak, I wanted to excuse myself, and did
excuse myself all the while, not thinking I
was doing it.
Less shame washes away a greater fault
than yours has been, said the master, there
fore disburden yourself of all sadness; and do
not forget that I am always at your side,
should it again fall out that fortune find you
where people are in a similar dispute, for the
wish to hear that is a base wish.
CANTO XXXI
and the same tongue first stung me,
so that it tinged both my cheeks, and then it
supplied the medicine to me; thus I have
heard that the lance of Achilles and of his
father was wont to be the cause, first of a
sad and then of a good gift.
We turned our backs to the wretched valley,
going up by the bank that girds it round,
crossing over it in silence. Here it was less
than night and less than day, so that my sight
went little ahead, but I heard a blast from a
horn so loud that it would have made any
thunderclap seem faint, and it directed my
eyes, following back on its course, wholly to
one place. After the dolorous rout when
Charlemagne lost the holy gest, Roland did
not sound a blast so terrible.

I had not long kept my head turned in that
direction when I seemed to see many lofty
towers; whereon I, Master, say, what city
is this? And he to me, It is because you
pierce the darkness from too far off that you
stray in your imagining; and when you reach
the place you will see plainly how much the
sense is deceived by distance; therefore, spur
yourself on somewhat more. Then lovingly
he took me by the hand and said, Before
we go further forward, in order that the fact
may seem less strange to you, know that these
are not towers, but giants, and every one of
them is in the pit, round about the bank
from the navel downward.
As when a mist is vanishing, the sight little
by little shapes out that which the vapor
hides that fills the air; so, as I pierced the
thick and murky atmosphere and came on
nearer and nearer to the brink, error fled from
me and fear grew upon me; for, as on its
round wall Montereggione crowns itself with
towers, so here the horrible giants, whom Jove
still threatens from heaven when he thunders,
betowered with half their bodies the bank
that encompasses the pit.
And already I discerned the face of one of
them, his shoulders and his breast, and great
part of his belly, and down along his sides
both arms.

Nature assuredly, when she gave up the art
of making creatures such as these, did right
well to deprive Mars of such executors; and
though she repents not of elephants and
whales, he who looks subtly holds her therein
more just and more discreet, for where the
instrument of the mind is added to an evil
will and to great power, men can make no
defense against it. His face seemed to me as
long and huge as the pine cone of St. Peters
at Rome, and his other bones were in propor
tion with it; so that the bank, which was an
aoron to him from his middle downward
showed us fully so much of him above, that
three
Frieslanders
would
have
made
ill
vaunt to have reached to his hair; for I saw
thirty great spans of him down from the
place where a man buckles his cloak.
Raphl
may
amecche
zab
almi,
the
fierce mouth, to which sweeter psalms were
not fitting, began to cry. And my leader
towards him, Stupid soul, keep to your horn
and with that vent yourself when rage or
other passion takes you. Search at your neck
and you will find the belt that holds it tied,
O soul confused see how it lies across your
great chest. Then he said to me, He is his
own accuser this is Nimrod, through whose
ill thought one sole language is not used
in the world.

Let us leave him alone and not speak in vain,
for every language is to him as his is to
others, which is known to none.
Then, turning to the left, we went farther
on and, at the distance of a crossbow shot,
we found the next, far more savage and
bigger. Who had been the master to bind him
I do not know, but he had his right arm
shackled behind, and the other in front, by
a chain which held him clasped from the
neck downward, so that upon his uncovered
part it was wound as far as the fifth coil.
This proud one chose to try his strength
against supreme Jove, said my guide, where
fore he has such requital. Ephialtes he is
called, and he made the great endeavors
when the giants put the gods in fear. The
arms he plied he moves no more.
And I to him, If it were possible, I should
wish my eyes might have experience of the
immense Briareus. To which he replied,
Hard by here you shall see Antaeus, who
speaks and is unfettered, and he will put us
down into the bottom of all guilt. He whom
you wish to see is much farther on, and he
is bound and fashioned like this one, except
that he seems more ferocious in his look.
Never did mighty earthquake shake a tower
so violently as Ephialtes forthwith shook
himself.

Then more than ever did I fear death, and
nothing else was wanted for it but the fear,
had I not seen his bonds. We then proceeded
farther on and came to Antaeus, who stood
full five ells, not reckoning his head, above
the rock.
O you that, in the fateful valley which
made Scipio heir of glory, when Hannibal
with his followers turned his back, did once
take for prey a thousand lions, and through
whom, had you been at the high war of
your brothers, it seems that some still believe
the sons of earth would have conquered, set
us down belowand disdain not to do so
where the cold locks up Cocytus. Do not
make us go to Tityus nor to Typhon this
man can give of that which is longed for
here. Bend down, therefore, and do not curl
your lip. He can yet restore your fame on
earth, for he fives and expects long fife yet,
if grace does not untimely call him to itself.
Thus spoke my master; and the other in
haste stretched out those hands of which
Hercules once felt the mighty grip, and took
my leader; and Virgil, when he felt their
grasp, said to me, Come here, that I may
take you, and then of himself and me he
made one bundle.
Such as the Garisenda seems to ones view,
beneath the leaning side, when a cloud is
passing over it against the direction in which
it leans,

such did Antaeus seem to me as I watched
to see him stoopand it was such a moment
that I should have wished to go by another
road! But he set us down gently on the bot
tom that swallows Lucifer with Judas, nor did
he linger there thus bent, but raised himself
like the mast of a ship.
CANTO XXXII
If I had harsh and grating rhymes, as would
befit the dismal hole on which all the other
rocks converge and weigh, I would press out
more fully the juice of my conception; but
since I do not have them, it is not without
fear that I bring myself to speak; for to
describe the bottom of the whole universe is
not an enterprise to be taken up in sport,
nor for a tongue that cries mamma and
daddy. But may those ladies aid my verse
who aided Amphion to wall in Thebes, so
that the telling may not be diverse from the
fact. O you beyond all others misbegotten
crowd who are in the place whereof it is
hard to speak, better had you here been
sheep or goats!
When we were down in the dark pit be
neath the feet of the giant, far lower, and I
was still gazing up at the high wall, I heard
a voice say to me, Look how you pass take
care not to tread on the heads of the wretched
weary brothers.

-
At this I turned and saw before me, and
under my feet, a lake which through frost
had the semblance of glass and not of water.
Never did the Danube in Austria, nor the
far-off Don under its cold sky, make in win
ter so thick a veil for their current as there
was here for had Tambernic fallen on it, or
Pietrapana, it would not have given a creak,
even at the edge. And as the frog lies to
croak with muzzle out of the water, when
the peasant girl dreams often of her gleaning,
so, livid up to where the hue of shame ap
pears, were the doleful shades within the ice,
setting their teeth to the note of the stork.
Each held his face turned downwards; by the
mouth their cold, and by the eyes the misery
of their hearts, is testified among them.
When I had looked round me awhile, I
glanced down at my feet and saw two who
were pressed so close together that they had
the hair of their heads intermixed. Tell me,
you who thus press your breasts together, I
said, who are you? And they bent back
their necks, and when they had raised their
faces towards me, their eyes, which before
were moist only within, welled up with tears,
which ran down over the lips, and the frost
bound each to each and locked them even
tighter; clamp never bound board on board so
strongly; whereupon they butted together like
two goats, such anger overcame them.

And one who had lost both ears from the
cold, with his face still downwards said,
Why do you gaze so much on us? If you
would know who these two are, the valley
whence the Bisenzio descends belonged to
their father Albert and to them. They issued
from one body; and all Caina you may
search and not find a shade more fit to be
fixed in ice;
not him whose breast and
shadow were pierced with a single blow from
Arthurs hand; not Focaccia; not this one,
who so obstructs me with his head that I see
no
farther,
and
who
was
named
Sassol
Mascheroniif you are Tuscan you now
know well who he was. And that you may
not put me to further speech, know that I
was Camiscion de Pazzi, and I await Carlino
to exculpate me.
After that I saw a thousand faces made
purple by the cold, whence a shuddering
comes over me, and always will, at frozen
fords. And while we were going toward the
center to which all gravity collects, and I was
shivering in the eternal chill, whether it was
will or fate or chance I do not know, but,
walking among the heads, I struck my foot
hard in the face of one.
Wailing he railed at me, Why do you
trample on me? If you do not come to in
crease the vengeance of Montaperti, why do
you molest me?

And I, Master, now wait here for me, that I
may rid me of a doubt respecting this one,
then you shall make me hasten as much as
you wish. My leader stopped; and I said to
the shade who was still cursing bitterly, Who
are you that thus reproach another? Nay,
who are you, he answered, that go through
Antenora smiting the cheeks of others, so that,
were you alive, it would be too much.
Alive I am, was my reply, and if you
crave fame, it may be worth much to you that
I note your name among the rest. And he
to me, The contrary is what I crave. Take
yourself hence and trouble me no more, for
ill do you know how to flatter in this depth.
Then I seized him by the hair of the nape
and said, Either youll name yourself, or not
a hair will be left on you here.
Whereon he to me, Though you strip me
bald, I will not tell you or show you who I
am, though you should fall a thousand times
upon my head.
I had already twisted his hair in my hand
and had yanked out more than one tuft, he
barking and with his eyes kept close down,
when another cried, What ails you, Bocca?
Is it not enough for you to make noise with
your jaws, but you must bark? What devil
is at you?
Now, said I, I do not wish you to speak
more, accursed traitor, for to your shame will
I carry true news of you.

Go away, he answered, and tell what you
will, but if you get out from here do not be
silent about him that just now had his tongue
so ready. He is lamenting here the silver of
the French. I saw, you can say, him of
Duera, there where the sinners are put to
cool. Should you be asked who else was
there, you have at your side him of the
Beccheria whose gullet was slit by Florence.
Gianni de Soldanieri I think is farther on,
with Ganelon,
and with Tebaldello
who
opened Faenza while it slept.
We had already left him when I saw two
frozen in one hole so close that the head of
the one was a hood for the other; and as
bread is devoured for hunger, so the upper
one set his teeth upon the other where the
brain joins with the nape. Not otherwise did
Tydeus gnaw the temples of Menalippus for
rage than this one was doing to the skull
and the other parts.
O you who by so bestial a sign show
hatred against him whom you devour, tell
me the wherefore, I said, on this condition,
that if you with reason complain of him, I,
knowing who you are and his offense, may
yet requite you in the world above, if that
with which I speak does not dry up.
CANTO XXXIII
IIom his savage repast the sinner raised
his mouth, wiping it on the hair of the head
he had spoiled behind, then began, You will
have me renew desperate grief, which even
to think of wrings my heart before I speak
of it. But if my words are to be seed that
may bear fruit of infamy to the traitor whom
I gnaw, you shall see me speak and weep
together. I do not know who you are, nor
by what means you have come down here;
but truly you do seem to me Florentine when
I hear you. You have to know that I was
Count Ugolino, and this is the Archbishop
Ruggieri. Now I will tell you why I am
such a neighbor to him. How, by effect of his
ill devising, I, trusting in him, was taken and
thereafter put to death, there is no need to tell;

but what you cannot have heard, that is, how
cruel my death was, you shall hear and you
shall know if he has wronged me.
A narrow hole in the Mew which be
cause of me has the title of Hunger, and in
which others are yet to be shut up, had,
through its opening, already shown me sev
eral moons, when I had the bad dream that
rent for me the veil of the future. This man
appeared to me as master and lord, chasing
the wolf and the whelps upon the mountain
for which the Pisans cannot see Lucca. With
trained hounds, lean and eager, he had put
in front of him Gualandi with Sismondi and
with Lanfranchi, and after a short run the
father and the sons seemed to me weary, and
it seemed to me I saw their flanks ripped by
the sharp fangs.
When I awoke before the dawn I heard
my children, who were with me, crying in
their sleep and asking for bread. You are
cruel indeed if you do not grieve already, to
think what my heart was foreboding; and if
you weep not, at what do you ever weep?
They were awake now, and the hour
approached
when
our
food
was
usually
brought to us, and each was apprehensive
because of his dream. And below I heard
them nailing up the door of the horrible
tower; whereat I looked in the faces of my
children without a word.

I did not weep, so was I turned to stone
within me. They wept, and my poor little
Anselm said, You look so, father, what ails
you? I shed no tear for that, nor did I
answer all that day, nor the night after, until
the next sun came forth on the world. As soon
as a little ray made its way into the woeful
prison, and I discerned by their four faces
the aspect of my own, I bit both my hands
for grief. And they, thinking I did it for
hunger, suddenly rose up and said, Father,
it will be far less painful to us if you eat of
us; you did clothe us with this wretched
flesh, and do you strip us of it!
Then I calmed myself in order not to
make them sadder. That day and the next
we stayed all silent Ah, hard earth! why did
you not open? When we had come to the
fourth day Gaddo threw himself outstretched
at my feet, saying, Father, why do you not
help me? There he died; and even as you
see me, I saw the three fall, one by one, be
tween the fifth day and the sixth; whence I
betook me, already blind, to groping over
each, and for two days I called them after
they were dead. Then fasting did more than
grief had done.
When he had said this, with eyes askance
he again took hold of the wretched skull with
his teeth, which were strong on the bone like
a dogs.
-
Ah, Pisa! shame of the peoples of the fair
land where the si is heard, since your neigh
bors are slow to punish you, let Capraia and
Gorgona shift, and make a hedge for Arno
at its mouth, so that it drown every soul in
you! For if Count Ugolino had the name of
betraying you of your castles, you ought not
to have put his children to such torture. Their
youthful years, you modern Thebes, made
Uguiccione and Brigata innocent, and the
other two that my song names above.
We went farther on, where the frost roughly
swathes another people, not bent downwards,
but with faces all upturned. The very weep
ing there prevents their weeping, and the
grief, which finds a barrier upon their eyes,
turns inward to increase the agony, for the
first tears form a knot and, like a crystal
visor, fill all the cup beneath the eyebrow.
And although, as in a callus, all feeling,
because of the cold, had departed from my
face, it now seemed to me as if I felt some
wind, wherefore I, Master, who moves this?
Is not every vapor extinguished here below?
And he to me, Soon shall you be where
your eye itself, seeing the cause that rains
down the blast, will make answer to you in
this.
-
And one of the wretches of the cold crust
cried out to us, O souls so cruel that the last
station is given to you, lift from my face the
hard veils, so that, before the weeping freezes
again, I may vent a little the misery that stuffs
my heart. Wherefore I to him, If you would
have me help you, tell me who you are, and
if I do not relieve you, may I have to go to
the bottom of the ice.
He replied then, I am Fra Alberigo; I am
he of the fruits from the evil garden, and
here I am paid date for fig.
Oh, I said to him, are you then dead
already ?
And he to me, How my body may fare
in the world above I have no knowledge.
Such vantage has this Ptolomea that often
times the soul falls down here before Atropos
sends it forth; and that you may more will
ingly scrape the glazen tears from my face,
know that as soon as the soul betrays as I
did, its body is taken from it by a devil who
thereafter rules it until its time has all re
volved. The soul falls headlong into this
cistern, and perhaps the body of the shade
that is wintering here behind me still appears
above on earth you must know if you are
but now come down. He is ser Branca dOria,
and many years have passed since he was
shut up thus.

I believe you are deceiving me, I said
to him, for Branca dOria is not yet dead,
and eats and drinks and sleeps and puts on
clothes.
In the ditch of the Malebranche above,
he said, where the sticky pitch is boiling,
Michel Zanche had not yet arrived when this
one left a devil in his stead in his own body,
as did also a near kinsman of his who com
mitted the treachery together with him. But
now reach out your hand here open my
eyes; and I opened them not for himand
to be rude to him was courtesy!
Ah Genoese! men strange to all good cus
tom and full of all corruption, why are you
not driven from the earth? For with the
worst spirit of Romagna I found one of you
who for his deeds even now is in soul bathed
in Cocytus, and in body appears still alive
on earth!
CANTO XXXIV
Vexilla regts prodeunt inferni towards us;
look forward therefore, said my master, see
if you discern him. As, when a thick fog
breathes, or when our hemisphere darkens to
night, a mill which the wind turns appears
from afar, such an edifice did I now seem to
see; then, because of the wind, I drew back
behind my leader, for there was no other
shelter there. I was now and with fear I do
put in into verse! where the shades were
wholly covered, showing through like straw
in glass. Some are lying, some are erect, this
with the head, that with the soles uppermost;
another, like a bow, bends his face to his feet.
When we had gone so far forward that it
pleased my master to show me the creature
who was once so fair, he took himself from
before me and made me stop, saying, Lo
Dis!and lo the place where you must arm
yourself with fortitude.
How frozen and faint I then became, ask
it not, reader, for I do not write it, because
all words would fail. I did not die and I did
not remain alive now think for yourself, if
you have any wit, what I became, deprived
alike of death and life!
The emperor of the woeful realm stood
forth from mid-breast out of the ice; and I
in size compare better with a giant than
giants with his arms see now how huge that
whole must be to correspond to such a part.
If he was once as beautiful as he is ugly
now, and lifted up his brows against his
Maker, well may all sorrow proceed from
him. Oh how great a marvel it was to me
when I saw three faces on his head one in
front and it was red, and the other two joined
to this just over the middle of each shoulder,
and all were joined at the crown. The right
one seemed between white and yellow, and
the left one was such in appearance as are
those who come from whence the Nile
descends. From under each there came forth
two mighty wings, of size befitting such a
birdsails at sea I never saw so broad. They
had no feathers, but were like a bats. And
he was Happing them, so that three winds
went forth from him,

whereby Cocytus was all congealed. With six
eyes he was weeping, and down over three
chins dripped tears and bloody foam. In each
mouth he champed a sinner with his teeth,
as with a heckle, and thus he kept three of
them woeful. To the one in front the biting
was nothing compared with the clawing, for
sometimes his back remained all stripped of
skin.
The soul up there that has the greatest
punishment, said the master, is Judas
Iscariot, who has his head within and plies
his legs outside. Of the other two who have
their heads below, the one that hangs from
the black muzzle is Brutus see how he
writhes and utters not a word; the other is
Cassius, who seems so stark of limb. But night
is rising again, and now we must depart, for
we have seen the whole.
As was his pleasure, I clasped him round
the neck, and he took advantage of time
and place, and when the wings were opened
wide he caught hold on the shaggy flanks;
down from shag to shag he descended be
tween the matted hair and the frozen crusts.
When we had come to where the thigh turns
just on the thick of the haunch, my leader
with labor and strain brought round his
head to where his shanks had been and
grappled on the hair like one who is climb
ing, so that I thought we were returning into
Hell again.
Cling fast, said the master, panting like
a man forspent, for by such stairs as these
we must depart from so much evil. Then he
issued forth through the opening of a rock
and placed me upon its edge to sit, then
reached toward me his cautious step. I raised
my eyes and thought to see Lucifer as I had
left him, and saw him with his legs held
upwardsand if I became perplexed then,
let the dull crowd judge who do not see
what is the point that I had passed.
Rise to your feet, said the master. The
way is long and the road is hard, and al
ready the sun returns to mid-tierce.
It was no palace hall where we were, but
a natural dungeon which had a bad floor and
want of light. Before I tear myself from the
abyss, my master, I said, when I had risen,
speak to me a little, to draw me out of error.
Where is the ice? And he there, how is it
that he is fixed thus upside down ? And how,
in so brief a time, has the sun made transit
from evening to morning?
And he to me, You imagine that you are
still on the other side of the center, where I
caught hold on the hair of the evil worm
that pierces the world. As long as I descended
you were on that side; when I turned myself
you passed the point to which all weights are
drawn from every part.

And you are now come beneath the hem
isphere opposite to that which canopies the
great dry land and underneath whose zenith
the Man was slain who was born and lived
without sin, and you have your feet upon a
little sphere which forms the other face of the
Judecca. Here it is morning when it is eve
ning there, and this one who made a ladder
for us with his hair is still fixed as he was be
fore. On this side he fell down from Heaven;
and the earth, which before stood out here,
for fear of him made a veil of the sea and
came to our hemisphere; and perhaps in order
to escape from him that which appears on
this side left here the empty space and rushed
upwards.
Down there, from Beelzebub as far re
moved as his tomb extends, is a space not
known by sight, but by the sound of a rivulet
descending in it along the hollow of the rock
which it has eaten out in its winding and
gently sloping course. My leader and I en
tered on that hidden road to return into the
bright world; and caring not for any rest,
we climbed up, he first and I second, so far
that through a round opening I saw some of
the beautiful things that Heaven bears; and
thence we issued forth to see again the stars.