CANTO 1

1* At one point midway on our path in life,
I came around and found myself now searching
through a dark wood, the right way blurred and lost.
4 How hard it is to say what that wood was,
a wilderness, savage, brute, harsh and wild.
Only to think of it renews my fear!
7 So bitter, that thought, that death is hardly more so.
But since my theme will be the good I found there, I mean
to speak of other things I saw.
10 I do not know, I cannot rightly say,
how ﬁrst I came to be here – so full of sleep,
that moment, abandoning the true way on.
13* But then, on reaching the foot of a hill
which marked the limit of the dark ravine
that had before so pierced my heart with panic,
16 I looked to that height and saw its shoulders
already clothed in rays from the planet
that leads all others, on any road, aright.
19 My fears, at this, were somewhat quieted,
though terror, awash in the lake of my heart,
had lasted all the night I’d passed in anguish.
22 And then, like someone labouring for breath
who, safely reaching shore from open sea,
still turns and stares across those perilous waves, 25 so in
my mind – my thoughts all ﬂeeing still –
I turned around to marvel at that strait
that let no living soul pass through till now.

28* And then – my weary limbs a little rested –
I started up the lonely scree once more,
the foot that drives me always set the lower.
31* But look now! Almost as the scarp begins,
a leopard, light and lively, svelte and quick,
its coat displaying a dappled marking.
34 This never ceased to dance before my face.
No. On it came, so bothering my tread
I’d half a mind at every turn to turn.
37 The time, however, was the hour of dawn.
The sun was mounting, and those springtime stars
that rose along with it when Holy Love
40 ﬁrst moved to being all these lovely things.
So these – the morning hour, the gentle season –
led me to ﬁnd good reason for my hopes,
43 seeing that creature with its sparkling hide.
Yet not so far that no fear pressed on me,
to see, appearing now, a lion face.
46 This, as it seemed, came on and on towards me
hungrily, its ravening head held high,
so that, in dread, the air around it trembled.
49 And then a wolf. And she who, seemingly,
was gaunt yet gorged on every kind of craving –
and had already blighted many a life –
52 so heavily oppressed my thought with fears,
which spurted even at the sight of her,
I lost all hope of reaching to those heights.
55 We all so willingly record our gains,
until the hour that leads us into loss.
Then every single thought is tears and sadness.
58 So, now, with me. That brute which knows no peace
came ever nearer me and, step by step,
drove me back down to where the sun is mute.
61 As I went, ruined, rushing to that low,
there had, before my eyes, been oﬀered one
who seemed – long silent – to be faint and dry.

64* Seeing him near in that great wilderness,
to him I screamed my ‘Miserere’ : ‘Save me,
whatever – shadow or truly man – you be.’
67* His answer came to me: ‘No man; a man
I was in times long gone. Of Lombard stock,
my parents both by patria were Mantuan.
70 And I was born, though late, sub Iulio.
I lived at Rome in good Augustus’ day,
in times when all the gods were lying cheats.
73 I was a poet then. I sang in praise
of all the virtues of Anchises’ son. From Troy
he came – proud Ilion razed in ﬂame.
76 But you turn back. Why seek such grief and harm?
Why climb no higher up that lovely hill?
The cause and origin of joy shines there.’
79 ‘So, could it be,’ I answered him (my brow,
in shy respect, bent low), ‘you are that Virgil,
whose words (a river running full) ﬂow wide?
82 You are the light and glory of all poets.
May this well serve me: my unending care, the love so
great, that’s made me search your writings through!
85 You are my teacher. You, my lord and law.
From you alone I took the ﬁne-tuned style
that has, already, brought me so much honour.
88 See there? That beast! I turned because of that.
Help me – your wisdom’s known – escape from her.
To every pulsing vein, she brings a tremor.’
91 Seeing my tears, he answered me: ‘There is
another road. And that, if you intend
to quit this wilderness, you’re bound to take.
94* That beast – you cry out at the very sight –
lets no one through who passes on her way.
She blocks their progress; and there they all die.
97 She by her nature is cruel, so vicious
she never can sate her voracious will,
but, feasting well, is hungrier than before.

100 She couples, a mate to many a creature,
and will so with more, till at last there comes
the hunting hound that deals her death and pain.
103 He will not feed on dross or cash or gelt,
but thrive in wisdom, virtue and pure love.
Born he shall be between the felt and felt.
106 To all the shores where Italy bows down
(here chaste Camilla died of wounds, Turnus,
Euryalus and Nisus, too), he’ll bring true health.
109 Hunting that animal from every town,
at last he’ll chase her back once more to Hell,
from which invidia has set her loose.
112 Therefore, considering what’s best for you,
I judge that you should follow, I should guide,
and hence through an eternal space lead on.
115 There you shall hear shrill cries of desperation,
and see those spirits, mourning ancient pain,
who all cry out for death to come once more.
118 And then you’ll see those souls who live in ﬁre,
content to hope – whenever that time comes –
they too will be among the blessed choirs.
121 To which if you shall ever wish to rise,
a soul will come far worthier than me.
I must, at parting, leave you in her care.
124 Reigning on high, there is an Emperor
who, since I was a rebel to His law,
will not allow His city as my goal.
127 He rules there, sovereign over every part.
There stands His capital, His lofty throne.
Happy the one He chooses for His own.’
130 ‘Poet,’ I answered, ‘by that God whose name
you never knew, I beg you, I entreat –
so I may ﬂee this ill and worse – that you
133 now lead me on to where you’ve spoken of,
to ﬁnd the gate where now Saint Peter stands,
and all those souls that you say are so sad.’

136 He made to move; and I came close behind.

CANTO 2

1* Daylight was leaving us, and darkened air
drawing those creatures that there are on earth
from all their labours. I alone, I was
4 the only one preparing, as in war,
to onward-march and bear the agony
that thought will now unfailingly relate.
7 I call the Muses. You great Heights of Mind
bring help to me. You, Memory, wrote down all I saw.
Now shall be seen the greatness of your power.
10 ‘You,’ I began, ‘my poet and my guide,
look at me hard. Am I in spirit strong enough
for you to trust me on this arduous road?
13* As you once told, the sire of Silvius
travelled, though still in fragile ﬂesh, to realms immortal,
and his senses all alive.
16 Nor will it seem (to those of intellect)
unﬁtting if the enemy of ill
should thus so greatly favour him, recalling
19 what ﬂowed from him, his name and who he was.
He was ordained, in empyrean skies,
father of Rome – its noble heart and empire.
22 To speak the truth: that city – and the sphere
it ruled – was founded as the sacred seat
for all inheritors of great Saint Peter.
25 You have proclaimed the glory of that march.
He on his way heard prophecies that led
to all his triumphs and the papal stole.

28* And then Saint Paul, the chosen Vessel, came –
to carry back a strengthening of that faith
from which salvation always must begin.
31 But me? Why me? Who says I can? I’m not
your own Aeneas. I am not Saint Paul.
No one – not me! – could think I’m ﬁt for this.
34 Surrendering, I’ll say I’ll come. I fear
this may be lunacy. You, though, are wise.
You know me better than my own words say.’
37 And so – as though unwanting every want,
so altering all at every altering thought,
now drawing back from everything begun –
40 I stood there on the darkened slope, fretting
away from thought to thought the bold intent
that seemed so very urgent at the outset.
43 ‘Supposing I have heard your words aright,’
the shadow of that noble mind replied,
‘your heart is struck with ignominious dread.
46 This, very often, is the stumbling block
that turns a noble enterprise oﬀ-course –
as beasts will balk at shadows falsely seen.
49 I mean that you should free yourself from fear,
and therefore I will say why ﬁrst I came,
and what – when ﬁrst I grieved for you – I heard.
52* With those I was whose lives are held in poise.
And then I heard a lady call – so blessed,
so beautiful – I begged her tell me all she wished.
55 Her eyes were shining brighter than the stars.
Then gently, softly, calmly, she began,
speaking, as angels might, in her own tongue:
58 “You, Mantuan, so courteous in spirit,
your fame endures undimmed throughout the world, and
shall endure as still that world moves onwards.
61 A man most dear to me – though not to fate –
is so entrammelled on the lonely hill
that now he turns, all terror, from the way.

64 My fear must be he’s so bewildered there
that – hearing all I’ve heard of him in Heaven – I rise too
late to bring him any aid.
67 Now make your way. With all your eloquence,
and all that his deliverance demands,
lend him your help so I shall be consoled.
70 For me you’ll go, since I am Beatrice.
And I have come from where I long to be.
Love is my mover, source of all I say.
73 When I again appear before my Lord,
then I shall often speak your praise to Him.”
She now fell silent. I began to speak:
76 “Lady of worth and truth, through you alone
the human race goes far beyond that bourne
set by the moon’s sphere, smallest of all the skies.
79 To me, so welcome is your least command,
I’d be too slow had I obeyed by now.
You need no more declare to me your will.
82 But tell me why you take so little care
and, down to this dead middle point, you leave
the spacious circle where you burn to go.”
85 “Since you desire to know so inwardly,
then brieﬂy,” she replied, “I’ll tell you why
I feel no dread at entering down here.
88 We dread an object when (but only when)
that object has the power to do some harm.
Nothing can otherwise occasion fear.
91 I was created by the grace of God –
and so untouched by all your wretchedness.
Nor can the ﬂames of this great ﬁre assail me.
94* In Heaven, a Lady, gracious, good and kind,
grieves at the impasse that I send you to,
and, weeping, rives the high, unbending rule.
97 She called Lucia, seeking her reply.
‘Your faithful one,’ she said to her, ‘has now
great need of you. I give him to your care.’

100 Lucia is the enemy of harm.
Leaving her place, she came at once to where
I sat – Rachel, long-famed, along with me.
103 ‘You, Beatrice, are, in truth, God’s praise.
Why not,’ she said, ‘make haste to him? He loves you,
and, loving you, he left the common herd.
106 Can you not hear the pity of his tears?
Do you not see the death that beats him down,
swirling in torrents that no sea could boast?’
109 No one on earth has ever run more rapidly
to seek advantage or else ﬂee from harm,
than I in coming – when her words were done –
112 down from that throne of happiness, to trust
in your great words, their dignity and truth.
These honour you and those who hear you speak.”
115 When she had said her say, in tears, she turned
her eyes away – which shone as she was weeping.
And this made me far quicker still for you.
118 So now, as she had willed, I made my way,
to raise you from the face of that brute beast
that stole your pathway up that lovely hill.
121 What is it, then? What’s wrong? Why still delay?
Why fondle in your heart such feebleness?
Why wait? Be forthright, brave and resolute.
124 Three ladies of the court of Paradise,
in utmost happiness watch over you.
My own words promise you the utmost good.’
127 As little ﬂowers bend low on freezing nights,
closed tight, but then, as sunlight whitens them, grow
upright on their stems and fully open,
130 now so did I. My wearied powers reviving,
there ran such wealth of boldness to my heart
that openly – all new and free – I now began:
133 ‘How quick in compassion her aid to me!
And you – so courteous, prompt to accede
to all the words of truth that she has oﬀered!

136 You, as you speak, have so disposed my heart
in keen desire to journey on the way
that I return to ﬁnd my ﬁrst good purpose.
139 Set oﬀ! A single will inspires us both.
You are my lord, my leader and true guide.’
All this I said to him as he moved on.
142 I entered on that deep and wooded road.

CANTO 3

1* ‘Through me you go to the grief-wracked city.
Through me to everlasting pain you go.
Through me you go and pass among lost souls.
4 Justice inspired my exalted Creator.
I am a creature of the Holiest Power,
of Wisdom in the Highest and of Primal Love.
7 Nothing till I was made was made, only
eternal beings. And I endure eternally.
Surrender as you enter every hope you have.’
10 These were the words that – written in dark tones –
I saw there, on the summit of a door.
I turned: ‘Their meaning, sir, for me is hard.’
13 And he in answering (as though he understood):
‘You needs must here surrender all your doubts.
All taint of cowardice must here be dead.
16* We now have come where, as I have said, you’ll see
in suﬀering the souls of those who’ve lost
the good that intellect desires to win.’
19 And then he placed his hand around my own,
he smiled, to give me some encouragement,
and set me on to enter secret things.
22 Sighing, sobbing, moans and plaintive wailing
all echoed here through air where no star shone,
and I, as this began, began to weep.
25 Discordant tongues, harsh accents of horror,
tormented words, the twang of rage, strident
voices, the sound, as well, of smacking hands,

28 together these all stirred a storm that swirled
for ever in the darkened air where no time was,
as sand swept up in breathing spires of wind.
31 I turned, my head tight-bound in confusion,
to say to my master: ‘What is it that I hear?
Who can these be, so overwhelmed by pain?’
34* ‘This baleful condition is one,’ he said,
‘that grips those souls whose lives, contemptibly, were
void alike of honour and ill fame.
37 These all co-mingle with a noisome choir
of angels who – not rebels, yet not true
to God – existed for themselves alone.
40 To keep their beauty whole, the Heavens spurned them.
Nor would the depths of Hell receive them in,
lest truly wicked souls boast over them.’
43 And I: ‘What can it be, so harsh, so heavy,
that draws such loud lamentings from these crowds?’
And he replied: ‘My answer can be brief:
46 These have no hope that death will ever come.
And so degraded is the life they lead
all look with envy on all other fates.
49 The world allows no glory to their name.
Mercy and Justice alike despise them.
Let us not speak of them. Look, then pass on.’
52 I did look, intently. I saw a banner
running so rapidly, whirling forwards,
that nothing, it seemed, would ever grant a pause.
55* Drawn by that banner was so long a trail
of men and women I should not have thought
that death could ever have unmade so many.
58* A few I recognized. And then I saw –
and knew beyond all doubt – the shadow of the one
who made, from cowardice, the great denial.
61 So I, at that instant, was wholly sure
this congregation was that worthless mob
loathsome alike to God and their own enemies.

64 These wretched souls were never truly live.
They now went naked and were sharply spurred
by wasps and hornets, thriving all around.
67 The insects streaked the face of each with blood.
Mixing with tears, the lines ran down; and then
were garnered at their feet by ﬁlthy worms.
70 And when I’d got myself to look beyond,
others, I saw, were ranged along the bank
of some great stream. ‘Allow me, sir,’ I said,
73 ‘to know who these might be. What drives them on,
and makes them all (as far, in this weak light,
as I discern) so eager for the crossing?’
76 ‘That will, of course, be clear to you,’ he said,
‘when once our footsteps are set ﬁrm upon
the melancholic shores of Acheron.’
79 At this – ashamed, my eyes cast humbly down,
fearing my words had weighed on him too hard –
I held my tongue until we reached the stream.
82* Look now! Towards us in a boat there came
an old man, yelling, hair all white and aged,
‘Degenerates! Your fate is sealed! Cry woe!
85 Don’t hope you’ll ever see the skies again!
I’m here to lead you to the farther shore,
into eternal shadow, heat and chill.
88 And you there! You! Yes, you, the living soul!
Get right away from this gang! These are dead.’
But then, on seeing that I did not move:
91 ‘You will arrive by other paths and ports.
You’ll start your journey from a diﬀerent beach.
A lighter hull must carry you across.’
94 ‘Charon,’ my leader, ‘don’t torment yourself.
For this is willed where all is possible
that is willed there. And so demand no more.’
97 The ﬂeecy wattles of the ferry man –
who plied across the liverish swamp, eyeballs
encircled by two wheels of ﬂame – fell mute.

100 But not the other souls. Naked and drained,
their complexions changed. Their teeth began
(hearing his raw command) to gnash and grind.
103 They raged, blaspheming God and their own kin,
the human race, the place and time, the seed
from which they’d sprung, the day that they’d been born.
106 And then they came together all as one,
wailing aloud along the evil margin
that waits for all who have no fear of God.
109 Charon the demon, with his hot-coal eyes,
glared what he meant to do. He swept all in.
He struck at any dawdler with his oar.
112* In autumn, leaves are lifted, one by one,
away until the branch looks down and sees
its tatters all arrayed upon the ground.
115 In that same way did Adam’s evil seed
hurtle, in sequence, from the river rim,
as birds that answer to their handler’s call.
118 Then oﬀ they went, to cross the darkened ﬂood.
And, long before they’d landed over there,
another ﬂock assembled in their stead.
121 Attentively, my master said: ‘All those,
dear son, who perish in the wrath of God,
meet on this shore, wherever they were born.
124 And they are eager to be shipped across.
Justice of God so spurs them all ahead
that fear in them becomes that sharp desire.
127 But no good soul will ever leave from here.
And so when Charon thus complains of you,
you may well grasp the sense that sounds within.’
130 His words now done, the desolate terrain
trembled with such great violence that the thought soaks
me once more in a terriﬁed sweat.
133 The tear-drenched earth gave out a gust of wind,
erupting in a ﬂash of bright vermilion,
that overwhelmed all conscious sentiment.

136 I fell like someone gripped by sudden sleep.

CANTO 4

1 Thunder rolling heavily in my head
shattered my deep sleep. Startled, I awoke –
as though just shaken in some violent grip.
4 And then once more my sight grew ﬁrm and ﬁxed.
Now upright and again afoot, I scanned,
intently, all around to view where I might be.
7 I found I’d reached – and this is true – the edge
of the abyss, that cavern of grief and pain
that rings a peal of endless miseries.
10 The pit, so dark, so wreathed in cloud, went down
so far that – peering towards its deepest ﬂoor – I still could
not discern a single thing.
13 ‘Let us descend,’ the poet now began,
‘and enter this blind world.’ His face was pale.
‘I shall go ﬁrst. Then you come close behind.’
16 I was aware of his altered colour.
‘How can I come, when you,’ I said, ‘my strength in every
time of doubt, are terriﬁed?’
19 ‘It is the agony,’ he answered me,
‘of those below that paints my features thus –
not fear, as you suppose it is, but pity.
22 Let us go on. The long road spurs our pace.’
So now he set himself – and me as well –
to enter Circle One, which skirts the emptiness.
25 Here in the dark (where only hearing told)
there were no tears, no weeping, only sighs
that caused a trembling in the eternal air –

28 sighs drawn from sorrowing, although no pain.
This weighs on all of them, those multitudes
of speechless children, women and full-grown men.
31 ‘You do not ask,’ my teacher in his goodness said,
‘who all these spirits are that you see here?
Do not, I mean, go further till you know:
34 these never sinned. And some attained to merit.
But merit falls far short. None was baptized.
None passed the gate, in your belief, to faith.
37 They lived before the Christian age began.
They paid no reverence, as was due to God.
And in this number I myself am one.
40 For such deﬁciencies, no other crime,
we all are lost yet only suﬀer harm
through living in desire, but hopelessly.’
43 At hearing this, great sorrow gripped my heart.
For many persons of the greatest worth
were held, I knew, suspended on this strip.
46* ‘Tell me, sir, tell me, my dearest teacher,’
so I began, determined – on a point
of faith, which routs all error – to be sure,
49 ‘has anyone, by merit of his own
or else another’s, left here then been blessed?’
And he, who read the sense my words had hid,
52 answered: ‘I still was new to this strange state
when, now advancing, I beheld a power
whose head was crowned with signs of victory.
55 He led away the shadow of our primal sire,
shades of his oﬀspring, Abel and Noah,
Moses, who uttered (and observed) the law,
58 of Abraham the patriarch, David the king,
Israel, his father and his own twelve sons,
with Rachel, too, for whom he laboured long,
61 and many more besides. All these He blessed.
This too I mean you’ll know: until these were,
no human soul had ever been redeemed.’

64 Speak as he might, our journey did not pause,
but on we went, and onward, through the wood –
the wood, I mean, of spirits thronging round.
67 Our steps were still not far from where, in sleep,
I fell, when now, ahead, I saw a ﬁre
that overcame a hemisphere of shade.
70 From this we were, as yet, some paces oﬀ,
but not so far that I should fail to see
that men of honour made this place their own.
73 ‘Honour you bring, my lord, to art and learning.
Inform me who these are – their honour great –
who stand apart in some way from the rest.’
76 He answered me: ‘The honour of their name
rings clear for those, like you, who live above, and here
gains favour out of Heaven’s grace.’
79 And then there came upon my ear a voice:
‘Honour be his, the poet in the heights.
His shadow now returns which had departed.’
82 The voice was still and silent once again.
And now, I saw, there came four noble shades,
no sorrow in their countenance, nor joy.
85 My teacher – that good man – began to speak:
‘Look on. Behold the one who, sword in hand,
precedes, as their true lord, the other three.
88* This is that sovereign Homer, poet.
Horace the satirist is next to come,
Ovid is third. Then (see!) there is Lucan.
91 All these, by right, must duly share with me
the name that sounded in that single voice.
They do me honour thus, and thus do well.’
94 And so I saw, assembling there as one,
the lovely college of that lord of song
whose verses soar like eagles over all.
97 Some little time they talked among themselves,
then turned to me and oﬀered signs of greeting.
On seeing all of this, my teacher smiled.

100 And greater honour still they paid me now:
they summoned me to join them in their ranks.
I came and walked as sixth among such wisdom.
103 So on we went to reach the dome of light
and spoke of things which, proper where I was,
are relegated, rightly, here to silence.
106 We reached the footings of a noble fort,
circled around by seven curtain walls
and also, as its moat, a lovely stream.
109 We passed this brook as though it were dry land.
Through seven gates I went with these ﬁve sages.
We then came out upon a verdant lawn.
112 Here there were some whose eyes were ﬁrm and grave
–
all, in demeanour, of authority –
who seldom spoke; their tones were calm and gentle.
115 And so we drew aside and found a space,
illuminated, open, high and airy,
where all of these were able to be seen.
118 And there, across that bright enamelled green,
these ancient heroes were displayed to me.
And I within myself am still raised high
121* at what I saw: Electra, many round her.
Hector I recognized, Aeneas, too,
and Caesar in arms, with his hawk-like eyes.
124 Camilla I saw and Penthesilea,
and King Latinus on the other side –
his daughter seated with him, his Lavinia.
127 Brutus (he drove proud Tarquin out), Lucrece
and Julia, Marcia, Cornelia – all these I saw,
and there alone, apart, the sultan Saladin.
130* And then – my brow raised higher still – I saw,
among his family of philosophers,
the master of all those who think and know.
133 To him all look in wonder, all in honour.
And, closer to his side than all the rest,

I now saw Socrates, I saw now Plato,
136 and one, Democritus, who claims the world is chance,
Diogenes and Tales, Anaxagoras,
Empedocles, Heraclitus and Zeno.
139 Then one I saw who gathered healing herbs –
I mean good Dioscorides. Orpheus I saw,
and Seneca the moralist, Linus, Tully,
142 Euclid (geometer) and Ptolemy,
Hippocrates, Avicenna and Galen,
Averroes, too, who made the Commentary.
145 I cannot here draw portraits of them all;
my lengthy subject presses me ahead,
and saying often falls far short of fact.
148 That company of six declines to two.
My lord in wisdom leads a diﬀerent way,
out of that quiet into trembling air.
151 And nothing, where I now arrive, is shining.

CANTO 5

1 And so from Circle One I now went down
deeper, to Circle Two, which bounds a lesser space and
therefore greater suﬀering. Its sting is misery.
4* Minos stands there – horribly there – and barking.
He, on the threshold, checks degrees of guilt,
then judges and dispatches with his twirling tail.
7 I mean that every ill-begotten creature,
when summoned here, confesses everything.
And he (his sense of sin is very ﬁne)
10 perceives what place in Hell best suits each one,
and coils his tail around himself to tell
the numbered ring to which he’ll send them down.
13 Before him, always, stands a crowd of souls.
By turns they go, each one, for sentencing.
Each pleads, attends – and then is tipped below.
16 ‘You there, arriving at this house of woe,’
so, when he saw me there, the judge spoke forth, (to
interrupt a while his formal role),
19 ‘watch as you enter – and in whom you trust.
Don’t let yourself be fooled by this wide threshold.’
My leader’s thrust: ‘This yelling! Why persist?
22 Do not impede him on his destined way.
For this is willed where all is possible
that is willed there. And so demand no more.’
25 But now the tones of pain, continuing,
demand I hear them out. And now I’ve come
where grief and weeping pierce me at the heart.

28 And so I came where light is mute, a place
that moans as oceans do impelled by storms,
surging, embattled in conﬂicting squalls.
31 The swirling wind of Hell will never rest.
It drags these spirits onwards in its force.
It chafes them – rolling, clashing – grievously.
34 Then, once they reach the point from which they fell…
screams, keening cries, the agony of all,
and all blaspheming at the Holy Power.
37 Caught in this torment, as I understood,
were those who – here condemned for carnal sin – made
reason bow to their instinctual bent.
40 As starlings on the wing in winter chills
are borne along in wide and teeming ﬂocks,
so on these breathing gusts the evil souls.
43 This way and that and up and down they’re borne.
Here is no hope of any comfort ever,
neither of respite nor of lesser pain.
46 And now, as cranes go singing lamentations
and form themselves through air in long-drawn lines,
coming towards me, trailing all their sorrows,
49 I saw new shadows lifted by this force.
‘Who are these people? Tell me, sir,’ I said,
‘why black air scourges them so viciously.’
52* ‘The ﬁrst of those whose tale you wish to hear,’
he answered me without a moment’s pause,
‘governed as empress over diverse tongues.
55 She was so wracked by lust and luxury,
licentiousness was legal under laws she made –
to lift the blame that she herself incurred.
58 This is Semiramis. Of her one reads
that she, though heir to Ninus, was his bride.
Her lands were those where now the Sultan reigns.
61 The other, lovelorn, slew herself and broke
her vow of faith to Sichaeus’s ashes.
And next, so lascivious, Cleopatra.

64 Helen. You see? Because of her, a wretched
waste of years went by. See! Great Achilles.
He fought with love until his ﬁnal day.
67 Paris you see, and Tristan there.’ And more
than a thousand shadows he numbered, naming
them all, whom Love had led to leave our life.
70 Hearing that man of learning herald thus
these chevaliers of old, and noble ladies,
pity oppressed me and I was all but lost.
73* ‘How willingly,’ I turned towards the poet,
‘I’d speak to those two there who go conjoined
and look to be so light upon the wind.’
76 And he to me: ‘You’ll see them clearer soon.
When they are closer, call to them. Invoke
the love that draws them on, and they will come.’
79 The wind had swept them nearer to us now.
I moved to them in words: ‘Soul-wearied creatures!
Come, if none forbids, to us and, breathless, speak.’
82 As doves, when called by their desires, will come –
wings spreading high – to settle on their nest,
borne through the air by their own steady will,
85 so these two left the ﬂock where Dido is.
They came, approaching through malignant air,
so strong for them had been my feeling cry.
88* ‘Our fellow being, gracious, kind and good!
You, on your journeying through this bruised air, here visit
two who tinged the world with blood.
91 Suppose the Sovereign of the Universe
were still our friend, we’d pray He grant you peace.
You pity so the ill perverting us.
94 Whatever you may please to hear or say,
we, as we hear, we, as we speak, assent,
so long – as now they do – these winds stay silent.
97 My native place is set along those shores
through which the river Po comes down, to be
at last at peace with all its tributaries.

100 Love, who so fast brings ﬂame to generous hearts,
seized him with feeling for the lovely form,
now torn from me. The harm of how still rankles.
103 Love, who no loved one pardons love’s requite,
seized me for him so strongly in delight
that, as you see, he does not leave me yet.
106* Love drew us onwards to consuming death.
Cain’s ice awaits the one who quenched our lives.’
These words, borne on to us from them, were theirs.
109 And when I heard these spirits in distress,
I bowed my eyes and held them low, until,
at length, the poet said: ‘What thoughts are these?’
112 I, answering in the end, began: ‘Alas,
how many yearning thoughts, what great desire,
have led them through such sorrow to their fate?’
115 And turning to them now I came to say:
‘Francesca, how your suﬀering saddens me!
Sheer pity brings me to the point of tears.
118 But tell me this: the how of it – and why –
that Love, in sweetness of such sighing hours,
permitted you to know these doubtful pangs.’
121* To me she said: ‘There is no sorrow greater
than, in times of misery, to hold at heart
the memory of happiness. (Your teacher knows.)
124 And yet, if you so deeply yearn to trace
the root from which the love we share ﬁrst sprang, then I
shall say – and speak as though in tears.
127 One day we read together, for pure joy
how Lancelot was taken in Love’s palm.
We were alone. We knew no suspicion.
130 Time after time, the words we read would lift
our eyes and drain all colour from our faces.
A single point, however, vanquished us.
133 For when at last we read the longed-for smile
of Guinevere – at last her lover kissed –
he, who from me will never now depart,

136 touched his kiss, trembling to my open mouth.
This book was Galehault – pander-penned, the pimp!
That day we read no further down those lines.’
139 And all the while, as one of them spoke on,
the other wept, and I, in such great pity,
fainted away as though I were to die.
142 And now I fell as bodies fall, for dead.

CANTO 6

1 As now I came once more to conscious mind –
closed in those feelings for the kindred souls
that had, in sudden sadness, overcome me –
4 wherever I might turn I saw – wherever
I might move, look around or settle my gaze –
new forms of torment, new tormented souls.
7 I am in Circle Three. And rain falls there,
endlessly, chill, accursed and heavy,
its rate and composition never new.
10 Snow, massive hailstones, black, tainted water
pour down in sheets through tenebrae of air.
The earth absorbs it all and stinks, revoltingly.
13* Cerberus, weird and monstrously cruel,
barks from his triple throats in cur-like yowls
over the heads of those who lie there, drowned.
16 His eyes vermilion, beard a greasy black,
his belly broad, his ﬁngers all sharp-nailed,
he mauls and skins, then hacks in four, these souls.
19 From all of them, rain wrings a wet-dog howl.
They squirm, as ﬂank screens ﬂank. They twist, they turn,
and then – these vile profanities – they turn again.
22 That reptile Cerberus now glimpsed us there.
He stretched his jaws; he showed us all his fangs.
And me? No member in my frame stayed still!
25 My leader, bending with his palms wide-spanned,
scooped dirt in each, and then – his ﬁsts both full – hurled
these as sops down all three ravening throats.

28 A hungry mongrel – yapping, thrusting out,
intent on nothing but the meal to come –
is silent only when its teeth sink in.
31 In that same way, with three repulsive muzzles,
the demon Cerberus. His thunderous growlings
stunned these souls. They wished themselves stone deaf.
34 Over such shadows, ﬂat in that hard rain,
we travelled onwards still. Our tread now fell
on voided nothings only seeming men.
37 Across the whole terrain these shades were spread,
except that one, at seeing us pass by,
sat, on the sudden, upright and then cried:
40* ‘You there! Drawn onwards through this stretch of Hell,
tell me you know me. Say so, if so you can.
You! Made as man before myself unmade.’
43 And I replied: ‘The awful pain you feel
perhaps has cancelled you from memory.
Till now, it seems, I’ve never even seen you.
46 Then tell me who you are, and why you dwell
in such a place? And why a pain like this?
Others may well be worse, none so disgusting.’
49 And he: ‘That burgh of yours – that sack of bile
that brims by now to overﬂow – I lived
as hers throughout my own ﬁne-weather years.
52 You knew me, like your city friends, as Hoggo.
So here I am, condemned for gullet sins,
lying, you see, squashed ﬂat by battering rain.
55 I’m not alone in misery of soul.
These all lie subject to the self-same pain.
Their guilt is mine.’ He spoke no further word.
58 ‘Hoggo, your heavy labours,’ I replied,
‘weigh on me hard and prompt my heavy tears.
But tell me, if you can, where they’ll all end,
61 the citizens of that divided town?
Is there among them any honest man?
Why is that place assailed by so much strife?’

64 His answer was: ‘From each side, long harangues.
And then to blood. The Wildwood boys
will drive the others out. They’ll do great harm.
67 But then, within the span of three brief suns,
that side will fall and others rise and thrive,
spurred on by one who now just coasts between.
70 For quite some time they’ll hold their heads up high
and grind the others under heavy weights,
however much, for shame, these weep and writhe.
73 Of this lot, two are honest yet not heard.
For pride and avarice and envy are
the three ﬁerce sparks that set all hearts ablaze.’
76 With this, his tear-drenched song now reached an end.
But I to him: ‘I still want more instruction.
This gift I ask of you: please do say more.
79* Tegghiaio, Farinata – men of rank –
Mosca, Arrigo, Rusticucci, too,
and others with their minds on noble deeds,
82 tell me, so I may know them, where they are.
For I am gripped by great desire, to tell
if Heaven holds them sweet – or poisonous Hell.’
85 And he: ‘These dwell among the blackest souls,
loaded down deep by sins of diﬀering types.
If you sink far enough, you’ll see them all.
88 But when you walk once more where life is sweet,
bring me, I beg, to others in remembrance.
No more I’ll say, nor answer any more.’
91 His forward gaze now twisted to a squint.
He stared at me a little, bent his head,
then fell face down and joined his fellow blind.
94 My leader now addressed me: ‘He’ll not stir
until the trumpets of the angels sound,
at which his enemy, True Power, will come.
97 Then each will see once more his own sad tomb,
and each, once more, assume its ﬂesh and ﬁgure,
each hear the rumbling thunder roll for ever.’

100 So on we fared across that ﬁlthy blend
of rain and shadow spirit, slow in step,
touching a little on the life to come.
103 Concerning which, ‘These torments, sir,’ I said,
‘when judgement has been ﬁnally proclaimed –
will these increase or simmer just the same?’
106* ‘Return,’ he said, ‘to your ﬁrst principles:
when anything (these state) becomes more perfect,
then all the more it feels both good and pain.
109 Albeit these accursed men will not
achieve perfection full and true, they still,
beyond that Day, will come to sharper life.’
112 So, circling on the curve around that path,
we talked of more than I shall here relate,
but reached the brow, from which the route descends,
115* and found there Plutus, the tremendous foe.

CANTO 7

1* ‘Popoi Satan, popoi Satan! Alezorul!’
So Plutus – shrill voice clucking on – began.
But Virgil, wise and noble, knowing all,
4 spoke out, to comfort me: ‘Let not your fears
occasion you distress. Despite his powers,
he cannot steal your right to scale this rock face.’
7 And then he turned to meet those rabid lips.
‘Silence, you execrable wolf!’ he said.
‘May fury gnaw you inwardly away.
10* To these dark depths, with every right he treads.
All this is willed where Michael, in the heights,
avenged the rapine wrought by prideful hordes.’
13 As sails, inﬂated by a furious wind,
fall in a tangle when the main mast snaps,
so too he ﬂopped, this predator, to ground.
16 Then downwards to the seventh sink we went,
advancing further down the curving wall
that bags up all the evil of the universe.
19 God in all justice! I saw there so many
new forms of travail, so tightly crammed. By whom?
How can our guilt so rend and ruin us?
22* Over Charybdis, the sea surge swirls
and shatters on the swell it clashes with.
So must these people dance their morisco.
25 I saw, in numbers greater than elsewhere,
two factions, hollering, this one to that,
who rolled great boulders, thrust by rib and tit.

28 Their stones would clash. Then wheeling they’d retreat
and yell, across their shoulders, cry and counter-cry.
‘You miser! Why?’ ‘Why ﬂing it all away?’
31 So back along that dismal curve they went,
to reach, at either end, the diametric points,
still screaming shamefully insulting chants.
34 Arriving – each round his half-circle – back,
each whisked around to tilt against the next other.
At this – my heart transﬁxed, or very nearly:
37 ‘Sir,’ I spoke up, ‘make clear to me what folk
these are, and whether – to our left – all those
with tonsured scalps could really have been clerics.’
40 ‘Without exception, all of these,’ he said,
‘when ﬁrst they lived, had such strabismic minds
they’d bear no check or measure on expense.
43* And when they reach the two points in the round
where converse crimes uncouple each from each,
they bark their meaning out and sound it clear.
46 Clerics they were – all those whose heads aren’t dressed
with shaggy hair. All popes – or cardinals.
In that lot, avarice displays its worst.’
49 ‘Well, sir,’ I said, ‘in any group like this,
I surely ought to recognize some few
who bore in life the taint of this disease.’
52 ‘You seek,’ he said, ‘to form an idle thought.
The mindless lives that made them all so foul
darken them now against all acts of mind.
55 Both, to eternity, will buck and butt.
These from their tombs will rise with ﬁsts tight shut, the
others with their curly manes cropped short.
58 Their frenzied sprees or febrile hoardings-up
have wrung from them the beauty of the world,
and brought them ﬁrmly to this ugly brawl.
61 You now can see, dear son, the short-lived pranks
that goods consigned to Fortune’s hand will play,
causing such squabbles in the human ranks.

64 For all the gold that lies beneath the moon –
or all that ever did lie there – would bring
no respite to these worn-out souls, not one.’
67 ‘Please tell me, sir,’ I said, a little more,
‘what can it be, this Fortune that you touch on,
that clasps all earthly goods between its claws?’
70 And he to me: ‘You idiotic creatures,
so greatly hurt by your own ignorance!
Feed on my words. I’d have you grasp their sense.
73* He who transcends in wisdom all that is,
wrought every sphere and gave to each a guide,
so every part shines out to every part
76 always in equal distribution of light.
So, too, above the splendours of the world,
He set a sovereign minister, ordained to move –
79 in permutations at the proper time –
vain goods from tribe to tribe, from blood to blood, in
ways from which no human wisdom hides.
82 And this is why, where one race rules supreme,
another faints and languishes: they all pursue
her judgements, secret as a snake in grass.
85 Your powers of mind cannot contend with her.
She, looking forwards, will pronounce her law,
advancing, as do other gods, her own domain.
88 Her permutations never come to rest.
It is necessity that makes her quick,
so thick they come by turns to meet their fate.
91 She is the one so often crossed and cursed
by those who, rightly, ought to sing her praise,
yet vilify her name and speak her ill.
94 But she, a holy being, pays no heed.
Happy, with all the other primal powers,
she turns her sphere, rejoicing in beatitude.
97* So let us now go down to greater pain.
The stars that rose when I ﬁrst stirred now fall.
We cannot stay too long. That is forbidden.’

100 Cutting across the circle, we approached
the margins of a spring – which, seething, spilled
and ran from there along an outer sluice.
103 The waters here were darker, far, than perse.
So, on – accompanied by murky waves –
downwards we travelled by a weirder route.
106 Into a swamp (by name, the loathsome Styx)
this melancholy brook makes way, and ﬁnds
the foot of those malignant, grey-black slopes.
109 As there I stood, intent and wondering,
I saw there, plunged within that stagnant fen,
a peevish people, naked, caked with mud.
112 Each battered each – and not with ﬁsts alone,
also with head butts, kicks and charging chests.
Their teeth, too, tore them, bit by bit, to shreds.
115* ‘You witness now,’ my gentle teacher said,
‘the souls of those whom anger overthrew.
And this I’d also have you know: be sure,
118 beneath the surface of this slick are some
whose sighs – as you can see at every turn –
now aerate that pullulating ﬁlm.
121 So, stuck there fast in slime, they hum: “Mournful
we were. Sunlight rejoices the balmy air.
We, though, within ourselves nursed sullen fumes,
124 and come to misery in this black ooze.”
That is the hymn each gurgles in his gorge,
unable to articulate a single phrase.’
127 So, on around this sour, revolting pit,
between the sludge and arid rock, we swung
our arc, eyes bent on those who gulped that slop.
130 We reached, in ﬁne, the bottom of a tower.

CANTO 8

1 And so I say (continuing) that, long before
we reached the bottom of that lofty tower,
our eyes had travelled upwards to its summit,
4 drawn by a pair of tiny ﬂames, set there –
as now we saw – to signal to a third,
so far away the eye could hardly grasp it.
7 I turned towards the ocean of all wisdom:
‘What do they mean?’ I said to him. ‘What answer does
the farther ﬁre now give? Who makes these signs?’
10 And he: ‘Across these waves of foaming mire,
you may already glimpse what they’ve been waiting for,
unless it still goes hidden by these marshy fumes.’
13 No bow string ever shot through air an arrow
rapider than now, at speed, I saw come on
towards us there, a mean little vessel,
16 within it – as pilot plying these waters –
a single galley man who strained the oar,
squealing: ‘You ﬁend! You’ve got it coming now!’
19* ‘Phlegyas, Phlegyas!’ my master said.
‘Your screams and shouts have, this time, little point.
We’re yours – but only while we cross this marsh.’
22 Like someone hearing that a massive hoax
has just, to his disgruntlement, been pulled on him, so
Phlegyas now stood, in pent-up rage.
25 My lord stepped down, and, entering the boat,
he made me, in my turn, embark behind.
The hull seemed laden only when I did.

28 At once – my leader boarded, me as well –
the ancient prow put out. It sawed the waves
more deeply than it would with other crews.
31* So, rushing forwards on that lifeless slick,
there jerked up, fronting me, one brimming slime who
spoke: ‘So who – you come too soon! – are you?’
34 And my riposte: ‘I come, perhaps; I’ll not remain.
But who might you be, brutishly befouled?’
His answer was: ‘Just look at me. I’m one
37 who weeps.’ And I to him: ‘Weep on. In grief,
may you remain, you spirit of damnation!
I know who you are, ﬁlth as you may be.’
40 And then he stretched both hands towards our gunwales.
My teacher, though – alert – soon drove him back, saying:
‘Get down! Be oﬀ with all that dog pack!’
43* And then he ringed both arms around my neck.
He kissed my face, then said: ‘You wrathful soul!
Blessed the one that held you in her womb.
46 That man, alive, ﬂaunted his arrogance,
and nothing good adorns his memory.
So here his shadow is possessed with rage.
49 How many, in the world above, pose there
as kings but here will lie like pigs in muck,
leaving behind them horrible dispraise.’
52 ‘Sir,’ I replied, ‘this I should really like:
before we make our way beyond this lake,
to see him dabbled in the minestrone.’
55 He gave me my answer: ‘Before that shore
has come to view, you’ll surely have your ﬁll.
And rightly you rejoice in this desire.’
58 Then, moments on, I saw that sinner ripped
to vicious tatters by that mud-caked lot.
I praise God still, and still give thanks for that.
61 ‘Get him,’ they howled. ‘Let’s get him – Silver Phil!’
That crazy Florentine! He bucked, he baulked.
Turning, the Guelf turned teeth upon himself.

64 We left him there. Of him, my story tells no more.
And yet my ears were pierced with cries of pain.
At which, I barred my eyes intently forwards.
67 ‘Dear son,’ my teacher in his goodness said,
‘we now approach the city known as Dis,
its teeming crowds and weighty citizens.’
70 ‘Already, sir,’ I said, ‘I clearly can
make out the minarets beyond this moat,
as bright and red, it seems, as if they sprang
73 from ﬁre.’ ‘Eternal ﬁre,’ he answered me,
‘burning within, projects, as you can see,
these glowing proﬁles from the depths of Hell.’
76 We now arrived within the deep-dug ditch –
the channel round that place disconsolate,
whose walls, it seemed to me, were formed of iron.
79 Not without, ﬁrst, encircling it about,
we came to where the ferry man broke forth:
‘Out you all get!’ he yelled. ‘The entry’s here.’
82 I saw there, on that threshold – framed – more than
a thousand who had rained from Heaven. Spitting
in wrath. ‘Who’s that,’ they hissed, ‘who, yet undead, 85
travels the kingdom of the truly dead?’
He gave a sign, my teacher in all wisdom,
saying he sought some secret word with them.
88 At which they somewhat hid their ﬁerce disdain.
‘You come, but on your own!’ they said. ‘Let him, so
brazen entering our realm, walk by.
91 He may retrace his foolish path alone –
or try it, if he can – while you’ll stay here.
You’ve been his escort through this dark terrain.’
94 Reader, imagine! I grew faint at heart,
to hear these cursed phrases ringing out.
I truly thought I’d never make it back.
97 ‘My guide, my dearest master. Seven times –
or more by now – you’ve brought me safely through.
You’ve drawn me from the face of towering doom.

100 Do not, I beg you, leave me here undone.
If we are now denied a clear way on,
then let us quickly trace our footsteps back.’
103 My lord had led me onwards to that place –
and now he said: ‘Do not be terriﬁed.
No one can take from us our right to pass.
106 Wait here a while. Refresh your weary soul.
Take strength. Be comforted. Feed on good hope.
I’ll not desert you in this nether world.’
109 So oﬀ he went. He there abandoned me,
my sweetest father. Plunged in ‘perhapses’,
I so remained, brain arguing ‘yes’ and ‘no’.
112 What he then said to them I could not tell.
Yet hardly had he taken up his stand
when all ran, jostling, to return inside.
115 They barred the door, these enemies of ours,
to meet his thrust. My lord remained shut out.
With heavy tread, he now came back to me.
118 Eyes bent upon the ground, his forehead shaved
of all brave conﬁdence, sighing, he said:
‘Who dares deny me entrance to this house of grief?’
121 To me he said: ‘You see. I’m angry now.
Don’t be dismayed. They’ll fuss around in there.
They’ll seek to keep us out. But I’ll win through.
124* This insolence of theirs is nothing new.
At some less secret gate they tried it once.
But that still stands without its lock, ajar.
127 You’ve seen the door, dead words scribed on its beam.
And now already there descends the slope –
passing these circles, and without a guide –
130 someone through whom the city will lie open.’

CANTO 9

1 The colour that courage failing brought out
so quickly in me, seeing my leader retreat,
made him, the sooner, check his own new pallor.
4 Intently, as though listening hard, he stopped.
Eyesight unaided – in that blackened air,
through foggy, dense swirls – could not carry far.
7* ‘This contest, even so, we’re bound to win.
If not…’ he began. ‘Yet granted such a one…
How long to me it seems till that one comes!’
10 I saw quite clearly how he covered up
his opening thoughts with those that followed on – words
inconsistent with the ﬁrst he spoke.
13 Yet fear came over me at what he had said.
And so, from these truncated words, I drew
a meaning worse, perhaps, than he had meant.
16 ‘Into the hollow deep of this grim bowl
do any make their way from that ﬁrst rung
where nothing, save for thwarted hope, brings pain?’
19 I put this question to him. ‘Seldom,’ he said.
‘It happens rarely that our people take
the path that I am venturing to tread.
22* It’s true, of course, I’ve been here once before,
conjured to come by bitter Erichtho –
she who called shadows back into their limbs.
25 A short while only was I bare of ﬂesh
until, as she compelled, I breached these walls
to fetch a spirit from the Judas ring.

28 That is the utmost deep, the darkest place,
the furthest from the sky’s all-turning sphere.
I know the way. Be conﬁdent, be sure.
31 This marsh, exhaling such a nauseous stench,
forms in a belt around the mournful town
and not without due anger shall we enter in.’
34 He said much more. But what I can’t recall.
My eyes in all attention now were drawn
towards the blazing summit of that gate,
37* where suddenly, at one point, there had sprung
three blood-stained Furies from the depths of Hell.
In pose and body they were, all three, women,
40 wound round about with water snakes, bright green.
Fringing their vicious brows they bore, as hair,
entwining snakes. Their curls were sharp-horned vipers.
43 And he – who knew quite well that these were slaves
who served the empress of unending tears –
said to me: ‘Look! The cruel Eumenides!
46 That one’s Megaera, on the left-hand side.
Weeping there stands Alecto, on the right.
Tisiphone’s between these two.’ He paused.
49 Each rent her breast with her own ﬁngernails.
With slapping palm, each beat herself and screamed – so
loud I strained, all doubt, against the poet.
52* ‘Come now, Medusa! Turn him – quick! – to stone!’
Staring hard down they spoke in unison.
‘The Theseus raid went unavenged! We’re wrong!’
55 ‘Turn round! Your back to them! Your eyes tight shut!
For if the Gorgon shows and you catch sight,
there’ll be no way of ever getting out.’
58 He spoke and then, himself, he made me turn
and, not relying on my hands alone,
to shield my eyes he closed his own on mine.
61 Look hard, all you whose minds are sound and sane,
and wonder at the meaning lying veiled
beyond the curtain of this alien verse.

64 Already across the turbid swell there came
a shattering resonance that, charged with panic,
evoked great tremors down each river bank.
67 In this way, too, a driving wind – impelled
by clashing currents through the burning air –
strikes at a grove and, meeting no resistance,
70 splinters the branches ﬂat and bears them oﬀ.
So, proudly on it goes, in clouds of dust,
shepherds and beasts all ﬂeeing in its path.
73 He loosed my eyes, ‘And now,’ he said, ‘stretch straigh
your strings of sight across this age-old scum
to where the fumes are thickest, stinging most.’
76 Like frogs that glimpse their enemy the snake,
and vanish rapidly across the pond –
diving till each sits huddling on its bed –
79 I saw a thousand ruined souls or more
scattering in ﬂight, ahead of one whose pace
passed, yet kept dry, across the river Styx.
82 The greasy air he wafted from his face,
his left hand drawn before him, as a fan.
And this was all the strain, it seemed, that tired him.
85 I saw full well that he was sent from Heaven,
I turned towards my teacher, and he signed
that I should bend in silent deference.
88 How full he seemed to me of high disdain!
He reached the gates. And, simply with his rod,
he opened them. For nothing held them ﬁrm.
91 ‘Outcasts from Heaven, driven beyond contempt!’
Thus, in that dreadful doorway, he began:
‘How is such truculence bred up in you?
94 Why so recalcitrant against that will
whose aim and purpose never can be maimed,
which has so often now increased your pain?
97* What is the point? Why kick against your fate?
Your guard dog Cerberus is still (remember?)
hairless for doing so, at chin and neck.’

100 He then turned back along the ﬁlthy road.
He spoke no word to us. He had the look
of someone gnawed and gathered up by care –
103 though not the cares that here confronted him.
And now we set our tread towards that land.
The holy words had made us conﬁdent.
106 We entered. And no force was oﬀered us.
So, eager to survey what such a fort
could lock within the conﬁnes of its wall,
109 when once inside, I cast my eyes about.
I see a plain, extending all around.
And everywhere is grief and wracking pain.
112* Compare: at Arles (the Rhône there forms a marsh),
or else at Polj by the Kvarner gulf,
which shuts the door on Italy and bathes its bounds, 115
are sepulchres that make the ground uneven.
And so, too, here, a tomb at every turn,
except that all was done more bitterly.
118 For ﬂames were scattered round among these tombs.
The pits were therefore so intensely ﬁred,
no tradesman needs his brand iron half so hot.
121 The covers of the tombs all stood half-raised;
and out of each there came such cruel lamenting
these must have been the cries from pain within.
124 And I to my master: ‘Who can these all be,
these people buried in the sepulchres?
They make their presence felt in such pained sighs?’
127 The answer: ‘These are the master heretics,
with all their followers from every sect.
These tombs are ﬁlled with more than you suspect.
130 Those of like mind are buried each with each.
The monuments are all at diﬀering heats.’
He turned towards the right, then on we went,
133 between the torments and high battlements.

CANTO 10

1 Onward along a secret path – conﬁned
between those ramparts and the shows of pain –
my teacher led and I was at his shoulder.
4 ‘You,’ I began, ‘true power and height of strength,
you bring me, turning, through these godless whirls.
Speak, if this pleases you. Feed my desires.
7 Those people lying in the sepulchres –
what chance is there of seeing them? The lids
are oﬀ already. No one stands on guard.’
10* ‘These tombs,’ he said, ‘will ﬁnally be shut
when, from Jehoshaphat on Judgement Day,
sinners bring back their bodies left above.
13* This circle is the cemetery for all
disciples of the Epicurus school,
who say the body dies, so too the soul.
16 The question, therefore, that you’ve put to me,
once you’re within, will soon be satisﬁed,
so, too, the longing that you keep unsaid.’
19 ‘I never would – my lord, my trusted guide –
keep, save for brevity, my heart from you.
And brevity you’ve urged on me before.’
22* ‘Tuscan! You go through the city of ﬁre
alive and speaking as a man of worth.
Come, if you will, and rest in this domain.
25 Your accent manifests that you were born
a son of that great fatherland on which,
perhaps, I wreaked too harsh an injury.’

28 This sound, so suddenly, came ringing out
from one among the sepulchres. Fearful,
I shrank still closer to my leader’s side.
31* ‘What’s wrong?’ he said to me. ‘Just turn around!
And see there, upright, risen, Farinata.
From cincture upwards you will see him whole.’
34 My gaze was trained already into his,
while he, brow raised, was thrusting out his chest, as
though he held all Hell in high disdain.
37 My leader (hands in animated aid)
drove me towards him down the line of vaults.
He counselled: ‘Let your words be duly measured.’
40 So there, beneath his sepulchre, I stood.
He looked me up and down a while, and then
inquired, half-scornfully: ‘Who were your forebears?’
43 I – always eager and obedient –
concealing nothing, laid all plainly forth.
At which he arched his brows a little more.
46 And then: ‘In ﬁerce hostility, they stood
against myself, my ancestors, my cause.
And so, on two occasions, they were scattered wide.’
49 ‘Scattered,’ I answered, ‘so they may have been,
but all came back from all sides, then and now.
And your men truly never learned that art.’
52* Then there arose, revealed before my eyes,
a shadow near the ﬁrst, seen from chin up,
which had, as I suppose, just risen to its knees.
55 It looked me all around, as though intent
on seeing whether, with me, was another.
But when its doubting glance was wholly spent,
58 weeping he called: ‘If you, through this eyeless
prison, pass on through height of intellect,
my son, where is he? And why not here with you?’
61 ‘I come,’ I said, ‘though not through my own strength.
The man who waits there leads me through this place to
one, perhaps, whom once your Guido scorned.’

64 The way he spoke – and what he suﬀered, too –
had now already spelled for me his name.
And that was why my answer was so full.
67* Upright suddenly: ‘What’s that you say?’
he wailed. “‘He once…”? You mean, he’s not alive?
And are his eyes not struck by bonny light?’
70 But then, in noticing that slight delay
which came before I oﬀered my reply,
he fell back ﬂat, and did not re-appear.
73 The other noble soul (at whose command
I’d come to rest) in no way changed expression.
He neither moved his neck nor bent his waist.
76* But still continuing in what he’d said:
‘If,’ he went on, ‘they learned that art so ill,
that is more torment than this bed of pain.
79 And yet no more than ﬁfty times that face
(the moon’s, who is our sovereign here) will shine
till you shall learn how heavy that art weighs.
82 If you once more would gain the lovely world,
tell me: how dare those burghers, in their laws,
oppose themselves so viciously to mine?’
85 My answer was: ‘The massacre, the mindless waste
that stained the ﬂowing Arbia with blood,
led, in our oratories, to these demands.’
88 Sighing, he did now move his head. ‘In none
of that,’ he said, ‘was I alone. And I
would not, without good cause, have gone with them.
91 I was alone – where all the rest could bear
to think that Florence might be swept away –
and boldly stood to speak in her defence.’
94 ‘Well (may your seed ﬁnd sometime true repose!)
untie the knot for me,’ I now besought,
‘so tightly twined around my searching thoughts.
97* You see, it seems (to judge from what I hear)
far in advance what time will bring to pass,
but otherwise in terms of present things.’

100 ‘We see like those who suﬀer from ill light.
We are,’ he said, ‘aware of distant things.
Thus far He shines in us, the Lord on high.
103 But when a thing draws near to us, our minds
go blank. So if no other brings us news,
then nothing of your human state is known to us.
106 You will from this be able to deduce
that all our knowledge will be wholly dead
when all the doors of future time are closed.’
109 And then I said, as though my heart were pierced
with guilt, ‘Go, say to him, that fallen soul,
his ﬁrst-born son is still among the living.
112 And if, before I answered, I fell mute,
I did so (make him understand) because
my thoughts – which you have solved – had strayed to
doubt.’
115 By now, my teacher had already called.
And so, with greater urgency I begged that soul
that he should tell me who was with him there.
118* ‘I lie,’ he answered, ‘with a thousand, more.
Enclosed beside me is the second Frederick.
Cardinal Octavian, too. Of others, I keep silent.’
121 And then he hid: and I, towards that great
poet of the ancient world, turned my steps backwards,
musing on words that seemed my enemy.
124 He went his way and, as he walked, he asked:
‘Why is it you’re so lost in thought, so blurred by doubt?’
And I responded fully to his words.
127 ‘Keep well in mind,’ my lord in wisdom said,
‘the things that you have heard against yourself.
But now,’ his ﬁnger raised, ‘attend to this:
130* when once again you stand within the rays
that she, whose lovely eyes see all things, casts,
you’ll learn from her what your life’s course will be.’
133 And then he swung, to tread towards the left.
We quit the wall and headed for the middle.

The path we took cut straight into a gorge,
136 and even from above the stench was foul.

CANTO 11

1 Now near the brink of a sheer escarpment
formed in a circle from great, shattered stones, we found,
below, a crueller bunch of souls.
4 And there, against an awful overﬂow –
a stink arising from the utmost depths –
we huddled back together by the lid
7* of one vast sepulchre, inscribed, I saw,
in words that said: ‘I guard Pope Anastasius,
drawn by Photinus from the rightful road.’
10 ‘Best not descend too rapidly, but ﬁrst
get more accustomed in our sense of smell
to this grim belch. We’ll then not notice it.’
13 These were my teacher’s words. To him I said,
‘Find something that will compensate, to waste
no time.’ ‘I’m thinking, as you see,’ he said,
16 and then began: ‘Dear son, within this rock-rimmed pit
three lesser circuits lie. And these (like those you leave
behind) go down by due degrees.
19* Each rung is crammed with spirits of the damned.
But listen now – so sight may henceforth serve – and hear
the “what” and “why” of their constraints.
22* Malice is aimed in all its forms – and thus
incurs the hatred of Heaven – at gross injustice, and,
aiming so, harms others, by deceit or force.
25* Deceit, though, is speciﬁcally a human wrong,
and hence displeases God the more. Liars
are therefore deeper down, and tortured worse.

28 Ring One throughout is meant for violent wills.
But violent acts may fall upon three persons.
And so this ring is shaped and formed in three.
31 To God, to self, to neighbours hurt is done
(to persons, of course, but also their possessions) in ways
that you will now hear argued out.
34 To those around us, death or grievous wounds
are wrought by violent hands, the things we own
ruined by outrage, extortion or ﬁre.
37 So in the agonies of Sub-ring One,
in diﬀerent squads, are homicides and thugs,
vandals and looters, bandits and brigands.
40 In violence, too, we turn against ourselves,
or else our own belongings. And thus
in Sub-ring Two are those (regret now vain)
43 who by their own free will strips oﬀ your world
or gambles all their competence away,
and weeps where, properly, they should rejoice.
46 Force, too, is oﬀered to the Deity
by hearts, blaspheming, that deny His power,
or else scorn Nature and her great largesse.
49* And so the imprint of the smallest ring
falls on Cahorsian bankers, as on Sodom,
and those who speak at heart in scorn of God.
52* As for deceit – which gnaws all rational minds –
we practise this on those who trust in us,
or those whose pockets have no room for trust.
55 Fraud of the second kind will only gash
the ligature of love that Nature forms:
and therefore in great Circle Two there nests
58 smarm and hypocrisy, the casting-up of spells,
impersonation, thievery, crooked priests,
embezzlement and pimping, such-like scum.
61 Fraud of the other sort forgets no less
the love that Nature makes, but then, as well,
the love particular that trust creates.

64 So in the smallest ring of all – that point
within the universe where Satan sits –
consumed eternally, are traitors, every one.
67 ‘Your explanation, sir,’ I said, ‘proceeds
with great lucidity. You clarify
the levels of this grim abyss and all within.
70 Yet tell me, too: those souls in that gross marsh,
those swept by winds, those creatures lashed by rain, and
those that clash with such abrasive tongues, 73 if they
all, likewise, face the wrath of God,
then why not racked within these ﬂame-red walls?
Or if they don’t, why are they as they are?’
76* ‘Why,’ he replied, ‘do your frenetic wits
wander so wildly from their usual track?
Or where, if not ﬁxed here, are your thoughts set?
79 Do you, at any rate, not call to mind
the terms in which your Ethics fully treats
those three dispositions that the Heavens repel: 82
intemperance, intentional harm and mad
brutality? Or that intemperance
oﬀends God least, and least attracts His blame?
85 If you think carefully of what this means,
and summon into thought what those souls are
who serve their sentence in the upper ring,
88 you’ll plainly see why these are set apart
from those condemned as felons, and, in pain,
less sharply hammered by divine revenge.’
91 ‘You are the sun who heals all clouded sight.
Solving my doubts, you bring me such content
that doubt, no less than knowing, is delight.
94* But still,’ I said, ‘turn backwards to the point
where you declared that usury oﬀends
God’s generosity. Untie that knot.’
97 ‘Philosophy, as those that read it know,
takes note,’ he said, ‘on more than one occasion, of how
the course that Nature runs is drawn

100 directly from the mind and art of God.
And if you read your Physics with due care,
you’ll see, before you’re many pages through,
103 that your art takes, as best it can, the lead
that Nature gives – as student does from master.
Your art is nearly grandchild, then, to God.
106 From these two principles – if you recall
the opening lines of Genesis – we’re bound to draw our
living strength and multiply our people.
109 But usurers adopt a diﬀerent course.
They place their hopes in other things, and thus make
mock of Nature’s self and her close kin.
112* But follow on. I’m ready now to go.
The writhing Fish have swum to the horizon.
The Wain lies high above the Western Wind.
115 The leap we now must make lies far beyond.’

CANTO 12

1 The place we’d reached – to clamber down that bank –
was alpine crag. No eye, considering
what else was there, would not have ﬂinched away.
4* Compare: an avalanche in Adige,
southwards of Trent, once struck the mountain ﬂank,
triggered perhaps by landslip or earthquake;
7 and boulders from the summit shifted down
in steps and stages to the valley ﬂoor,
to oﬀer those up there a downward route.
10* Likewise the path we trod down this ravine.
And on the angle where the incline broke,
there lay stretched out the infamy of Crete,
13 spawned in the womb of Pasiphae’s fake heifer.
And when he saw us there he gnawed himself,
as though ﬂailed ﬂat within by utter rage.
16 My leader in his wisdom called towards him:
‘You may suppose that he’s the duke of Athens,
who dealt you, in the world above, your death.
19 You monster! Move aside! This one’s not come
provided with instructions from your sister.
He comes to see what you are suﬀering here.’
22 A stunned bull, stricken by its mortal blow,
wrenches, that instant, free from noose and rope.
It cannot walk but skips and hops about.
25 The Minotaur, I saw, behaved like that.
‘Run!’ shouted Virgil, watching out. ‘A gap!
Better get down while still his fury bites.’

28 So down across the scree we picked our way.
Beneath my feet, the stones would often move,
teetering beneath the strange new weight they bore.
31* I walked on, deep in thought. ‘Perhaps,’ he said,
‘you’re thinking of this landslide? Or that guard
whose brutal anger I have just eclipsed?
34 When once before (I’d like you now to know)
I came down here and entered lower Hell,
these cliﬀs had yet to suﬀer any rock fall.
37 But certainly, if I have got this right,
there once came One who gathered up from Dis
the stolen treasure of its highest place.
40 Moments before, a tremor in every part
disturbed these fetid depths. The universe
must then, I think, have felt that love through which 43 it
often turns (so some suppose) to chaos.
At that same point, these age-old crags were rent
and left both here and elsewhere as they are.
46 But ﬁx your eyes upon the valley ﬂoor.
We now are nearing the river of blood.
There simmer all whose violence damaged others.’
49 What blind cupidity, what crazy rage
impels us onwards in our little lives –
then dunks us in this stew to all eternity!
52 I saw there (as my guide had said I would)
a ditch of great dimensions in an arc
that stretched its wide embrace around the plain.
55* And there, between the hill foot and those banks,
were centaurs, running in a long-drawn line,
armed – as they’d been on earth to hunt – with arrows.
58 On seeing us descend, they all reined in.
Three of that company then sallied forth,
their barbs and bow strings already well picked.
61 And one, still distant, shouted out: ‘What pain
have you to meet, now making down that butte?
Tell us from there. Or else I draw my bow.’

64 My teacher in response then said: ‘To Chiron –
there, just beside you – we shall make reply.
You are too headstrong. And you always were.’
67 ‘That’s Nessus there,’ he said, alerting me.
‘He died for love of lovely Deianira,
but then avenged himself with his own blood.
70 The middle one (eyes ﬁxed upon his chest)
is Chiron the Great. He nurtured Achilles.
Pholus, who lived so full of wrath, is third.
73 Around this ditch, in thousands these all run,
and loose their arrows at those souls that strain
higher beyond the blood than guilt allows.’
76 We drew now closer to those swift-foot beasts.
Then Chiron plucked a shaft and, with its notch,
he combed his beard and tucked it from his jaw.
79 And, once he’d made his noble mouth thus free,
he said to his companions: ‘Have you seen
the one behind, how all he touches moves?
82 A normal dead man’s feet would not do that.’
My trusted leader was now standing where,
around the waist, the double nature weds.
85 He answered thus: ‘He is indeed alive.
To me it falls to show him this dark vale.
Necessity, not pleasure, leads us on.
88* Someone whose hymn is the “Alleluia”
paused in that song to hand me this new task.
He is no robber, I no thievish soul.
91 Now in the name of that True Power by which
I move each step along this tangled way,
allot a guide to us from your own band
94 to show us where the ford might be, and bear
this man beside me on his crupper.’
He is no spirit walking through the air.
97 Now Chiron turned, to pivot to his right.
‘Go back!’ he said to Nessus. ‘Be their guide.
Make any troop you stumble on give way.’

100 The escort by our side, we now moved on
along the shore of boiling vermilion
where souls, well boiled, gave vent to high-pitched yells.
103 Some, so I saw, were plunged there to the brow.
‘And these,’ the mighty centaur said, ‘are tyrants.
They lent their hands to violent gain and blood.
106* So here, in tears for their unpitying sins,
with Alexander there is vicious Dionysius,
who brought on Sicily such grieving years.
109 That forehead there – its quiﬀ as black as jet –
is Azzolino. At his side the blond
Opizzo d’Este, who – and this is true –
112 was done to death by his own bastard son.’
I turned towards the poet, who now said:
‘Let him go ﬁrst and I’ll be next to come.’
115 A little further on, the centaur stopped,
arched over people who emerged, it seemed,
throat high above the seething of that stream.
118 There, to one side, he pointed out a shade.
‘He stabbed,’ he said, ‘in the bosom of God,
the one whose heart drips blood still on the Thames.’
121 I now saw some with heads above the ﬂood,
then others further on, their torsos clear.
And these, in greater numbers, I could recognize.
124 Then, gradually, the blood race grew more shallow –
so that by now it only stewed their toes.
And there we found the crossing of the ditch.
127 ‘On this side – see? – the boiling stream grows less.
So, correspondingly,’ the centaur said,
‘I’d have you understand that, over there,
130 the bed is pressed, in process point by point,
still further down until it ﬁnds the place
at which in pain great despots wring out moans.
133 Justice divine on that side sharply stings
the hun Attila – scourge of all the earth –
Pyrrhus and Sextus. There it also milks

136 the tears eternally that boiling wave unlocks
from Renier the Mad to Renier da Corneto,
who wrought such strife upon the open roads.’
139 And then he turned and passed the ford once more.

CANTO 13

1 No, Nessus had not reached the other side
when we began to travel through a wood
that bore no sign of any path ahead.
4 No fresh green leaves but murky in colour,
no boughs clean arc-ed but knotty and entwined,
no apples were there but thorns, poison-pricked.
7* No scrubby wilderness so bitter and dense
from Cécina as far as Corneto
oﬀers a den to beasts that hate ploughed farmlands.
10 Their nest is there, those disgusting Harpies
who drove the Trojans from the Strophades,
with grim announcements of great harm to come.
13 Wings widespreading, human from neck to brow,
talons for feet, plumage around their paunches,
they sing from these uncanny trees their songs of woe.
16 Constant in kindness, my teacher now said:
‘Before you venture further in, please know
that you now stand in Sub-ring Number Two,
19 and shall until you reach the Appalling Sands.
So look around. Take care. What you’ll see here
would drain belief from any word I uttered.’
22 A wailing I heard, dragged out from every part,
and saw there no one who might make these sounds,
so that I stopped, bewildered, in my tracks.
25* Truly I think he truly thought that, truly,
I might have, just, believed these voices rose
from persons hiding from us in the thorn maze.

28 Therefore: ‘If you,’ my teacher said, ‘will wrench
away some sprig from any tree you choose,
that will lop short your feeling in such doubt.’
31* And so I reached my hand a little forwards.
I plucked a shoot (no more) from one great hawthorn.
At which its trunk screamed out: ‘Why splinter me?’
34 Now darkened by a ﬂow of blood, the tree
spoke out a second time: ‘Why gash me so?
Is there no living pity in your heart?
37 Once we were men. We’ve now become dry sticks.
Your hand might well have proved more merciful
if we had been the hissing souls of snakes.’
40 Compare: a green brand, kindled at one end –
the other oozing sap – whistles and spits
as air ﬁnds vent, then rushes out as wind.
43 So now there ran, out of this fractured spigot,
both words and blood. At which I let the tip
drop down and stood like someone terror-struck.
46 ‘You injured soul!’ my teacher (sane as ever)
answered. ‘If he had only earlier
believed what my own writings could have shown,
49 he’d not have stretched his hand so far towards you.
This, though, is all beyond belief. So I was forced to urge a
deed that presses on my own mind still.
52 But tell him now who once you were. He may,
in turn, as remedy, refresh your fame,
returning to the world above by leave.’
55 The trunk: ‘Your words, sir, prove so sweet a bait,
I cannot here keep silence. Don’t be irked
if I a while should settle on that lure and talk.
58 I am the one who held in hand both keys
to Federigo’s heart. I turned them there,
locking so smoothly and unlocking it
61 that all men, almost, I stole from his secrets.
Faith I kept, so true in that proud oﬃce
I wasted sleep and lost my steady pulse.

64 That harlot Scandal, then (her raddled eyes
she never drags from where the emperor dwells,
the vice of court life, mortal blight of all)
67 enﬂamed the minds of everyone against me.
And they in ﬂames enﬂamed the great Augustus.
So, happy honours turned to hapless grief.
70 My mind – itself disdainful in its tastes –
believing it could ﬂee disdain by dying,
made me unjust against myself so just.
73 By all these weird, new-wooded roots, I swear
on oath before you: I did not break faith,
nor failed a lord so worthy of regard.
76 Will you – should either head back to the world –
bring comfort to my memory, which lies
still lashed beneath the stroke of envious eyes?’
79 Pausing a while, he said (my chosen poet),
‘He’s silent now, so waste no opportunity.
If there is more you wish to know, then say.’
82 ‘You,’ I replied, ‘must speak once more and ask
what you believe will leave me satisﬁed.
I could not do it. Pity wrings my core.’
85 And so he did once more begin: ‘Suppose
that freely, from a generous heart, someone
should do, imprisoned ghost, what your prayers seek, 88
tell us, if you should care to, this: how souls
are bound in these hard knots. And, if you can:
will anyone be ever loosed from limbs like these?’
91 At that (exhaling heavily) the trunk
converted wind to word and formed this speech:
‘The answer you require is quick to give:
94 When any soul abandons savagely
its body, rending self by self away,
Minos consigns it to the seventh gulf.
97 Falling, it ﬁnds this copse. Yet no one place
is chosen as its plot. Where fortune slings it,
there (as spelt grains might) it germinates.

100 A sapling sprouts, grows ligneous, and then
the Harpies, grazing on its foliage,
fashion sharp pain and windows for that pain.
103 We (as shall all), come Judgement Day, shall seek
our cast-oﬀ spoil, yet not put on this vestment.
Keeping what we tore oﬀ would not be fair.
106* Our bodies we shall drag back here; and all
around this melancholy grove they’ll swing,
each on the thorn of shades that wrought them harm.’
109 Attention trained entirely on that stock
(thinking, in truth, it might as yet say more),
we now were shocked by a sudden uproar,
112 as if (to make comparison) you’d heard some hog
and all the boar hunt baying round its stand –
a sound composed of beasts and thrashing twigs.
115* And look there, on the left-hand side, there came,
at speed, two ﬂeeing, naked, scratched to bits,
who broke down every hurdle in that scrub.
118 One was ahead: ‘Quick, quick! Come, death! Come
now!’
The other (seeming, to himself, too slow)
was yelling: ‘Lano! Oh, your nimble heels
121 weren’t half so nifty at the Toppo rumble!’
And then (it may be his breath was failing),
he sank to form a clump beside a shrub.
124 Behind these two, the wood was teeming, full
of black bitches, ravenous and rapid,
as greyhounds are when slipping from their leads.
127 These set their teeth on that sad, hunkered form.
They tore him all to pieces, chunk by chunk.
And then they carried oﬀ those suﬀering limbs.
130 My guide then took me gently by the hand,
and led me to the bush, which wept (in vain)
through all of its blood-stained lacerations,
133 saying: ‘O Jacopo da Santo Andrea!
What use was it to take me as your shield?

Am I to blame for your wild, wicked ways?’
136 My teacher came and stood above that bush.
‘So who were you,’ he said, ‘who, pierced to bits, breathes
painful utterance in jets of blood?’
139 ‘You souls,’ he said, ‘you come – but just in time –
to see the massacre, in all its shame,
that rends away from me my fresh green fronds.
142* Place all these leaves beneath this grieving stump.
I too was from that city, once, which chose
Saint John as patron over Mars – its ﬁrst –
145 whose arts, since spurned, have always brought us
harm.
And were there not, beneath the Arno bridge,
some traces visible of what he was,
148 those citizens who built it all anew
on ashes that Attila left behind
would then have laboured with no end in view.
151 Myself, I made a gallows of my house.’

CANTO 14

1 Seized, in pure charity, by love of home,
I gathered up those scattered leaves, then bore them
towards my countryman, his voice grown dim.
4 And then, from there, we reached the boundary
of circuits two and three and witnessed now,
in horror and awe, how skilful justice is.
7 To make more manifest what now was new,
we’d reached, I’d better say, an open plain
that dusts all vegetation from its ﬂoor.
10 Round this, the wood of pain creates a fringe
(as likewise, round that wood, the wretched ditch).
And here we halted at the very edge.
13* The ground beneath was brushed with coarse, dry sand,
no diﬀerent from those arid Libyan wastes
on which the feet of Cato marched to war.
16 Great God! Your vengeance must be rightly feared
by all who read the verses I compose
to say what there was straight before my eyes.
19 I saw ahead a ﬂock of naked souls.
And all were weeping, very mournfully.
But each was subject to a diﬀerent law.
22 Some of these folk lay supine on the ground,
and some sat huddling, tight about themselves.
Others again strode endlessly around.
25 The latter were, in number, far the more.
Those lying ﬂat, though fewer, were in tongue
more free at voicing their sharp miseries.

28 And over all that barren sand there fell –
as slow as Alpine snow on windless days –
a shower of broad-winged ﬁre ﬂakes drifting down.
31* Recall how Alexander, on his march
across the climes of scorching India,
saw clouds of ﬁre that fell around his troops
34 and reached the earth still whole. He therefore made
his squadrons stamp the ground, since, broken down,
these vapours proved far easier to quell.
37 So, too, eternally, the ﬂames fell here.
The sand caught ﬁre, like tinder under ﬂint,
and doubled – from beneath – the upper punishment.
40 Unrestingly, their wretched hands jived on –
now up, now down, now high, now low, slap, clap! –
to shake fresh drops of ardour from their skin.
43 So I began: ‘You, sir, in everything
have conquered all, though not those demons, hard-faced
at the gate of Dis, who stopped us on that step.
46* That hero there, who’s he? Heedless he seems
of these incendiaries. Scowling in scorn,
it seems he lies unripened by the rain.’
49 The man himself roared forth (for he had seen
that I, in questioning my lord, meant him):
‘What I, once living, was, so dead I am.
52 Yes! Jupiter may tire the blacksmith out
from whom he tore in wrath the thunder spear
by which I stood, on my last day, drilled through;
55* and others, too, he may exhaust, in shifts
that stoke that black forge under Mount Jabal,
bellowing: “Vulcan! Aid, more aid! Good man!”
58 just as he did when battle raged at Flegra,
and loose his bolts at me with all his force…
But no! No sweet revenge he’d have on me!’
61 My leader then spoke out with greater strength
than ever I, till then, had heard him use:
‘Oh, Capaneus! Pride yet uninterred!

64 This punishment, in consequence, is yours.
No agony, except your own great rage,
would serve as proper answer to your ire.’
67 And then – a better look around his lips –
he turned to me. ‘This man,’ he said, ‘a king,
was one of seven laying siege to Thebes.
70 God he disdained – he seems to, still – and seemed
to pay Him scant regard. So, as I said:
disdain alone must be his sole medallion.
73 And now keep close behind. Take every care.
Do not set foot upon these blistering sands.
Follow the wood’s verge round at every step.’
76 In silence now, continuing, we came
to where a rill ﬂows spurting from the grove.
Remembering its redness, I still squirm.
79* As in Viterbo there’s the Bubble Brook –
which scarlet women, bathing, share between them –
so this stream took its course across the sand.
82 That rivulet, in bed and bank, was formed
of stone, as also were the margins by its side.
This, I could tell, was where our best path lay.
85 ‘Among so many other things that I –
since entering the gate through which
no foot is ever disallowed an entry –
88 have shown to you, nothing your eyes have spied
has been more notable than this stream here,
above which all the sparks grow dim and die.’
91 These were the words my leader spoke to me.
And I besought him, through his great largesse,
to grant the food in granting me the hunger.
94* ‘Mid-sea,’ he said, ‘there lies a land now waste.
To us, this land is known as Crete, where once,
when Saturn ruled as king, the world was chaste.
97 A mountain stands there, Idaeus its name.
This, once, rejoiced in streams and leafy fronds,
but now stands abandoned like forbidden ground.

100 Once, Rhea – seeking for a sanctuary –
chose here to lay her boy child, Jove. And then,
to hide his wailings, called for dance and din.
103 Within those caves an aged man stands tall.
His back is turned to Egypt and Damiatta.
Rome is the mirror into which he stares.
106 His head is modelled in the ﬁnest gold.
Of purest silver are his arms and breast.
Then downwards to the fork he’s brightest brass,
109 and all below is iron of choicest ore.
The right foot, though, is formed of terracotta.
On that he puts more weight than on the left.
112 And every part that is not gold is cracked.
Tears through this single ﬁssure drizzle down,
then, mingling, penetrate the cavern wall.
115 Their rocky course cascades to this deep hollow.
They form the Acheron, Styx and Phlegethon.
These then disgorge themselves through this tight race,
118 until (since there is no way further on)
they all collect as Cocytus. But you yourself
will see that pool. So I’ll not tell the tale.’
121 ‘If,’ I now put to him, ‘this gutter ﬂows
from somewhere in our human world, then why
do we just see it at this selvage hem?’
124 ‘You know,’ he said, ‘this place is circular.
Yet, far as you have sunk in your descent,
your path has always tended to the left.
127 So you have still not spanned the circle round;
and if new things now show themselves to us,
it should not stir amazement on your brow.’
130 And I kept on at him: ‘And so, sire, where
are Phlegethon and Lethe found? The one, you say,
rains down in tears. The other you are silent of.’
133 ‘By everything you ask,’ he said, ‘I’m pleased.
And yet, as one solution, you should note
the seething redness of the waters here.

136 Lethe you’ll see, but far beyond this ditch.
Its waves are where the soul will go to wash,
when guilt, repented, is at last removed.’
139 And then: ‘It’s time for you to leave this wood.
So come. Keep close behind me as you do.
The banks, which are not burned, provide a road.

CANTO 15

1 We’re carried down by one of those hard shores,
while vapours from the brook rise, arching up,
to save both stream and margins from the ﬁre.
4 Flemings, enﬂamed – from Wissant on to Bruges –
in terror of the ﬂoods that blast towards them,
construct great screens to put the sea to ﬂight.
7 So, too, the Paduans, along the Brent,
attempt to shield their castles and estates,
before its source (Carinthia) is touched by heat.
10 Modelled on some original like these
(whatever master hand contrived them so)
these breaks were formed, though not that high or broad.
13 By now, we’d left the grove so far behind
that, even had I turned around to look,
I’d not have glimpsed the tract where it was found.
16 But here we came across a band of souls
who milled around the ditch and met our tread.
And each one peered at us – as people will
19 on evenings when the moon is new – their brows
towards us, wrinkled into squinting blades,
like those of some old tailor at his needle.
22* Eyed up and down so closely by this clan,
I now was recognized, as known, by one
who plucked my hem and cried: ‘How marvellous!’
25 And I – as he then stretched an arm towards me –
ﬁxed eyes so keenly through his ﬁre-baked look
that these singed features could not fend away

28 my mind from knowing, truly, who he was.
And, reaching down a hand towards his face,
I answered him: ‘Brunetto, sir, are you here?’
31 ‘Do not, my dearest son,’ he said, ‘be vexed,
but let Brunetto Latino turn and walk
a while along with you. The troops can run!’
34 ‘I pray, sir, to the utmost, do. Or should
you wish,’ I said, ‘I’ll sit with you, so long
as this man here agrees. I go with him.’
37 ‘Dear boy,’ he said, ‘if any in this herd
should ever pause, he lies a hundred years
powerless to fan these searing ﬁres away.
40 And so move on. I’ll follow at your coat-tails
then catch up later with that entourage,
which, as it goes, bewails eternal loss.’
43 I did not dare climb down to quit the causeway
and walk with him on equal terms. But still,
as though in reverence, I kept my head bowed low.
46 ‘What chance or destiny,’ he then began,
‘leads you down here before your ﬁnal day?
And who is this that shows the way to you?’
49 ‘There, up above,’ I answered him, ‘where life
is halcyon, I lost myself – my path all blurred –
in some great deep before my years were full.
52 Only as dawn rose, yesterday, I turned
aside. Then he – as yet again I turned –
appeared, and guides me on the road back home.’
55 ‘If,’ so he answered, ‘you pursue your star,
then doubtless you will reach a glorious goal,
supposing, in the happy life, I knew you well.
58 And I myself (had not I died too soon),
seeing how kind the Heavens looked on you,
would willingly have helped you in your work.
61* But that malignant and ungrateful race
descending ab antico from Fiesole
(they still retain the taint of crag and hill)

64 will act, because you act so well, as bitter foes.
That much is logical: no luscious ﬁg
can rightly thrive where small, sour sorbus grows.
67 The world, since ancient times, has known they’re blind.
The tribe is grasping, envious and proud.
Keep yourself clean of habits of their kind.
70 Fortune for you reserves such great renown
that both these factions – Black and White – will seek to
set their teeth in you. Keep goats from grass!
73 Well may these cattle from Fiesole
make themselves straw but never touch the sprout
that springs (if any does within their dung)
76 to bring to life the sacred seed of Rome –
of those remaining when that ancient place
became the very home and nest of malice.’
79 ‘If all,’ I said to him, ‘that I might ask
were answered, and in full, then you would not
be exiled, as you are, from human nature.
82 Fixed in my thoughts, and working at my heart,
an image of you still endures – a dear, good father – as, in
the world, you were when hour by hour
85 you taught me how a man becomes eternal.
How great my gratitude must be, will show,
while I still live, in all my tongue will tell.
88 I write, as you recount it here, the story
of my future course, and keep your words with others.
A lady, if I come to her, will comment.
91 On this point only I would have you clear:
that I, so long as conscience does not chide,
am well prepared for all that Fortune wills.
94 In what you vouch, my ears hear nothing new.
Let Fortune, therefore, do as Fortune pleases –
whirl at her wheel like yokels at their hoe.’
97 My teacher, who had now turned right-about,
looked back at me and ﬁxed me with his eye.
‘Those listen well,’ he said, ‘who take good note.’

100 So on I go, speaking with lawyer Brunetto.
I ask who his companions are, the great
and good, the eminent, and men of note.
103 ‘Of some,’ he said, ‘you’re right to want to know.
More laudable of others not to speak.
Our time would be too short for all that din.
106* But all of them, be sure, were men of learning,
authorities and dons of world renown,
besmirched, when living, with the self-same sin.
109 And so, among this dismal crowd, runs Priscian.
D’Accorso, too – the Prof. And if you yearn
to set your eyes on such-like mangy scabs,
112 you could. That bishop there! The Slave of Slaves
transferred him to Vicenza from the Arno.
He left his muscles, ill-distended, there.
115 I would say more. Yet further I may not
advance nor any longer talk with you.
I see new smoke there, rising from the sand.
118* I can’t consort with those who now draw near.
My Treasury – may that commend itself.
In that, I still live on. I ask no more.’
121* Around he swung. To me he seemed like one
who, in the ﬁelds around Verona, runs
for that ﬁne prize, a length of green festoon.
124 He seemed to be the one that wins, not loses.

CANTO 16

1 I stood already where the roar and boom
of waters falling to the next great ring
could now be heard – a rumble like a beehive.
4 But then appeared, together, at the run,
three shadows, swerving from a further squad
of those in rasping torment from the rain.
7 Towards us, as they came, each cried aloud:
‘Stop there! To us, it seems, you’re dressed like one who
travels from our own degenerate homeland.’
10 No! No! I saw how branded by the bite
of ﬁre their limbs all were. New wounds! Old scars!
This, though mere memory, still brings me pain.
13 My teacher paused, attending to their cries.
And then, his eyes on me, he said: ‘Now wait.
We owe to these men here some courtesy.
16 Indeed, were not the nature of this place
to shoot down barbs of ﬁre, then haste (I’d say)
should properly be shown by you, not them.’
19 And so again, as now we came to rest,
they all began the song they’d sung before
and, turning, formed among themselves a wheel.
22 Compare: prize wrestlers, with their bare skin oiled,
circle – until they clash, then punch and gouge –
in search of some advantage, grip or hold.
25 These likewise. As they wheeled around, each ﬁxed
their glances hard on me. And so their necks
turned counter always to the track they trod.

28 ‘The misery,’ thus one began, ‘of these
vile sands may render us, and all our prayers,
contemptible, our faces, too, now black and burned.
31 But let our reputations bend your heart.
And who are you – now tell – whose living step,
in perfect safety, scours the paths of Hell?
34 This man, whose prints my own feet trample on,
although he now goes naked, shorn of hair,
was once of higher rank than you’d imagine.
37* Grandson by birth of our good Gualdrada,
he was, by title, Conte Guido Guerra.
Much he achieved alive with mind and sword.
40 The other next to him who ﬂails the sand
is Lord Tegghiaio of the Aldobrands.
He ought to have more pleased the world in word.
43 I, in excruciating pain with them,
was Iacopo Rusticucci. And, yes,
it was my wife who did me greatest harm.’
46 If only I’d had cover from the ﬁre,
I’d willingly have ﬂung myself among them.
(I think my teacher would have suﬀered this.)
49 But since, down there, I’d soon have singed and baked,
fear got the better of the good intent
that stirred my appetite for their embrace.
52 So I began: ‘Great grief, not scornfulness,
to see your state was planted in my heart
(and only slowly will it shed its leaves)
55 the instant that my lord, in words to me,
led all my inner thoughts to understand
that persons such as you might soon come by.
58 I am of your place, too. So, I have heard –
and always with aﬀection have proclaimed –
the deeds you’ve done and honour of your name.
61 I now take leave of galling fruits, to seek
sweet apples, promised by my lord in truth,
but ﬁrst must reach the centre of the circle.’

64 ‘Long may your soul lead forth your living limbs!’
So, in reply, said one of them. ‘And – grant
your fame may long shine after you! – then say:
67 do courtesy and valour dwell, as once
they did, within the circuit of our city walls?
Or have they utterly departed thence?
70* Report of this, from courtly Borsiere
(who only joined us here of late, and goes
with our companions there), has caused us pain.’
73 ‘That race of newly rich, and rapid gains,
these seeds, Fiorenza, bring to ﬂower in you
excess and pride. And you already weep for that.’
76 With head thrown back, I cried this, all aloud,
and they, the three (accepting this response),
glanced each to each like those who’ve heard plain truth.
79 ‘If at so little cost,’ they said, ‘you speak
so well and satisfy what others seek,
then you may happily pronounce at will.
82 And so, should you escape from these dark haunts,
and go once more to see the lovely stars,
when you, with pleasure, say that “I was there”,
85 then do, we beg you, speak of us to others.’
With this they broke their wheel and, as they ﬂed, their
agile limbs in ﬂight were quick as wings.
88 No ‘amen’ ever was so swiftly said
as these three disappeared before our eyes.
And now my teacher thought that we could leave.
91 I came behind. But now, not travelling far,
the sound of the water was so near at hand
that we could scarcely hear each other speak.
94* Compare: a river, near its native source,
runs through the eastern Apennines due east,
and ﬁrst descends the slopes of Monte Viso.
97 Its tranquil name up there is Acqua Cheta.
But then, on ﬂowing to its lower bed,
at Forlì it assumes a diﬀerent mode,

100 and thunders here, in one great bound, above
the Alp Saint Benedict, where – were it eased
from ledge to ledge – the height would need a thousand.
103 So, likewise, down through one great shattered force,
we found, resounding there, a blackened stream –
the din of which would soon have stunned our ears.
106* Around my waist I wore a braided cord,
and had on past occasion thought, by this,
to snare the leopard with its painted hide.
109 My leader told me I should slip this oﬀ.
And when I’d got it wound from round my waist,
I handed it across in twisted knots.
112 And then he turned towards his right-hand side,
and ﬂung it, bunched, some distance from the bank.
It fell, to ﬁnd the depths of that great sink.
115 ‘Astounding things,’ I told myself, ‘are bound
to come at this astounding sign, which now
my master follows with his waiting eye.’
118 How cautious we must always be when faced
with those who, far beyond observing deeds,
can gaze in wisdom on our very thoughts.
121 So now he said: ‘There soon shall rise what I
expect (what you in thought now dream) will come.
All shall be, soon, uncovered to your eyes.’
124 Always, to every truth that looks, in face,
like lies, one ought (quite ﬁrmly) bar the lip
lest, guiltless, what one says should still bring shame.
127 I cannot, though, be silent here. Reader,
I swear by every rhyme this comedy
has caused to chime (may it not lack long favour)
130 that now, through dark and fatty air, I saw –
to strike sheer wonder in the steadiest heart –
approaching us a ﬁgure swimming up,
133 as any diver might who’d gone below
to loose an anchor snagged on rocks (or something
other, hidden in the sea) and now comes back,

136 arms stretching high, legs drawn to make the stroke.

CANTO 17

1 ‘Behold! The beast who soars with needle tail
through mountains, shattering shields and city walls!
Behold! The beast that stinks out all the world!’
4* To me, my lord spoke thus, then beckoned up
the monster to approach the jutting prow
that marked the end of all our marble paths.
7 It came, that ﬁlthy image of deceit.
Its head and trunk it grounded on the shore.
It did not draw its tailpiece to the bank.
10 The face was that of any honest man,
the outer skin all generosity.
Its timber, though, was serpent through and through: 13
two clawing grabs, and hairy to the armpits,
its back and breast and ribcage all tattooed
with knot designs and spinning little whorls.
16* No Turk or Tartar wove a ﬁner drape,
more many-coloured in its pile or tuft.
Nor did Arachne thread such tapestries.
19 Compare: on foreshores, sometimes, dinghies stand
in water partly, partly on the shingle –
as likewise, in the land of drunken Germans,
22 beavers will do, advancing their attack.
So did this beast – the worst that there can be – there on
the rocky rim that locks the sand.
25 Out into emptiness it swung its tail,
and twisted upwards its venomous fork.
The tip was armed like any scorpion’s.

28 My leader said: ‘We need to bend our path
a little further down, towards that vile
monstrosity that’s lolling underneath.’
31 So down we went, towards the right-hand pap.
Ten paces, and we’d reached the very edge,
stepping well clear of ﬂames and burning shoals.
34 And then, on getting to that spot, I saw,
a little further on along the sandbar,
a group just sitting near the gaping waste.
37 And here my teacher said: ‘To carry back
experience of the ring that we’re now in,
go over there and look at their behaviour.
40 But do not stay to talk at any length.
Till you return, I’ll parley with this thing,
for him to grant us use of his great thews.’
43 So once again, along the outward brow
of Circle Seven I progressed alone
to where there sat these souls in misery.
46 The pain they felt erupted from their eyes.
All up and down and round about, their hands
sought remedies for burning air and ground.
49 Dogs in the heat of summer do the same,
stung by the bluebottle, gadﬂy and ﬂea,
swatting at swarms with paw pads or with snout.
52 On some of these – these faces under showers
of grievous, never-ceasing rain – I set my eyes.
I recognized no single one, but noticed
55 around the neck of each a cash bag hung
(each with its own insignia and blaze),
on which their staring eyes appeared to graze.
58* So I, too, gazing, passed among them all,
and saw, imprinted on a yellow purse,
a blue device, in face and pose a lion.
61 Then, as my view went trundling further on,
I saw another, with a blood-red ﬁeld –
the goose it bore was whiter, far, than butter.

64 And then I heard (from one whose neat, white sack
was marked in azure with a pregnant sow):
‘What are you after in this awful hole?
67 Do go away! Yet you – as Vitaliano is –
are still alive. Then understand me, please:
he’ll sit on my left ﬂank, my one-time neighbour.
70 I’m Paduan, among these Florentines,
and often they all thunder in my ears:
“Oh, let him come,” they’ll scream, “that sovereign knight,
73 who’ll bring the bag that bears three rampant
goats.’”
At which, in throes, he wrenched his mouth awry
and ox-like curled his tongue to lick his nose.
76 And I, who feared that, if I lingered long,
I’d irritate the one who’d said ‘Be brief’,
now turned my back upon these worn-out souls.
79 My leader, I discovered there, had jumped
already on that fearsome creature’s rump.
‘Come on,’ he urged, ‘be stalwart and courageous.
82 From now on we’ll descend by stairs like these.
Mount at the front so I can come between,
to see the tail won’t bring you any harm.’
85 Like someone shivering as the grip of ‘ﬂu
spreads over him, pale to the ﬁngernails,
who trembles merely at the sight of shade…
88 well, that was me, as these words carried over.
The threat of shame, however, when one’s lord
is near, emboldens one to serve him well.
91 I settled down between those gruesome shoulders.
I wished to say (my voice, though, would not come): ‘Yes.
Please! Be sure you hold me very ﬁrm.’
94 He, who in many an earlier ‘perhaps’
had aided me, as soon as I got on,
ﬂinging his arms around me, hugged me tight,
97 and said: ‘Go on, then, Geryon. Cast out!
Wheel wide about to make a smooth descent.

Think of the strange new burden on your back.’
100 Slowly astern, astern, as ferries leave
the quay where they had docked, so he moved out.
Then, only when he felt himself ride free,
103 he turned the tail where breast had been before,
and – stretching long, as eels might do – set sail, paddling
the air towards him with his paws.
106* No greater fear (so, truly, I believe)
was felt as Phaeton let the reins go loose,
and scorched the sky as still it is today,
109 nor yet by ill-starred Icarus – his loins
unfeathering as the wax grew warm – to whom
his father screamed aloud: ‘You’re going wrong!’
112 And then with fear I saw, on every side,
that I was now in air, and every sight
extinguished, save my view of that great beast.
115 So swimming slowly, it goes on its way.
It wheels. It descends. This I don’t notice –
except an upward breeze now fans my face.
118 By then I heard, beneath us to the right,
the roar of some appalling cataract.
And so I leant my head out, looking down.
121 More timorous of falling still, I saw
that there were ﬁres down there and heard shrill screams.
Trembling, I huddled back and locked my thighs.
124 And then I saw, as I had not before,
the going-down – the spirals of great harm –
on every side now coming ever nearer.
127 A falcon, having long been on the wing,
and seeing neither lure nor bird to prey on,
compels the falconer to sigh: ‘You’re coming in,’
130 then sinks down wearily to where it left so fast.
A hundred turns – and then, far from its lord,
it lands, disdainful, spiteful in its scorn.
133 So, too, did Geryon, to place us on the ﬂoor,
the very foot of that sheer, towering cliﬀ.

And then, unburdened of our persons now,
136 vanished at speed like barbed bolt from a bow.

CANTO 18

1* There is in Hell a place called Rottenpockets,
rock, all rock, its colour rusted iron,
as is the wall that circles all around.
4 Dead in the centre of that poisoned plain
a well yawns open – empty, broad and deep.
Of that (when it’s ‘convenient’) I’ll have my say.
7 For now, between the well mouth and the clench
of cliﬀ, a circling belt goes round, its ﬂoor divided into ten
deep trenches.
10 Compare: to guard the outer walls of castles,
moats in concentric multiples are dug,
and form the ﬁgure of a wheel around them.
13 That was the pattern that these trenches made.
And where, from fortresses, pontoons run out
to link each threshold to the other shore,
16 so, at the bottom of the precipice,
radials ride over every bank and ditch
till, at the pit, they’re stopped and then sucked in.
19 This was the place where – shaken from the spine
of Geryon – we found ourselves. The poet
took the left-hand fork. I followed in his track.
22 Then, to my right, I saw fresh suﬀering:
new whips, new torments and new torturers,
and Pocket One, with these, was all a-ﬂutter.
25 Down in those depths, stark naked, there were sinners
who came, on this side of a line, face on,
and faster, in our direction, on the other.

28* The Romans, in the Jubilee, devised
a way for pilgrims and pedestrians,
in all their multitudes, to cross the Bridge
31 so that, on one side (making for Saint Peter’s),
they faced the Castle and, conversely, took
the other lane when heading for the Hill.
34 This way, that way, over the dismal rock,
there were (I saw them!) horny demons lashing,
lashing at the rear with vicious scourges.
37 Ouch! Even at the ﬁrst stroke they lifted
their trotters; and none of them, for certain,
stayed for second helpings – fewer still for thirds.
40 But then, as I was moving on, looks clashed,
my own and one of theirs. I said straight oﬀ:
‘There’s one I’ve seen before. Once was enough.’
43 To get him in my sights, I stopped my stride;
and, pausing quietly along with me,
my guide now let me turn a short way back.
46 The body beaten abased its gaze, as if
it thought he really could hide. That didn’t work.
‘You there,’ I said, ‘Eyes-down! Bashful, are we?
49* Assuming that your proﬁle’s not a lie,
then you are Venedico Caccianemico.
So what brings you to this killing pickle?’
52 And he to me: ‘I grudge you my reply.
You and your bright words grind one out of me,
and make me call the world that was to mind.
55 Foul tittletattle got this right. It’s me;
I ﬁxed it. My sister Ghisolabella
did let the marquis have his way with her.
58 Don’t think, though, I’m the only Bolognese
who’s here in tears. The place is full of us.
Between the rivers Sàvena and Reno,
61* far fewer tongues speak “yes” as “yeah” than here.
And if you want to get this straight, recall
what money means to Bolognese hearts.’

64 And, as he spoke, a devil now struck out:
‘Push oﬀ, you pimp,’ he said, and swung his lash.
‘There aren’t tarts here for you to turn to cash.’
67 I turned to join my escort once again,
and walked with him a few steps further on,
then reached an outcrop jutting from the bank.
70 We made our way quite easily up that,
then, turning right along the splintered ridge, we left that
bunch to endless circulation.
73 So now we came to where the vault gapes wide
to let those beaten beings pass beneath.
‘Pause here,’ said Virgil, ‘and ensure some glimpse 76 of
all these woebegones now marks your eye.
They go in our direction. So, as yet,
you’ve had no chance to look them in the face.
79 We saw from that decrepit bridge the traces
of a second crew. These came towards us.
These, as well, were driven by whistling whips.
82 I did not prompt him, but my mentor said:
‘Look at that hero there, advancing now!
He seems, for all his pain, to shed no tear.
85* How great an air of majesty he still retains!
He is that Jason who, astute and strong,
made Colchos grieve to lose its gold-ﬂeeced ram.
88 Journeying on, he passed the isle of Lemnos,
where cold and reckless women had, by then,
delivered death to every living male.
91 Yet he, with hints and eloquence of phrase,
beguiled the young Hypsipyle – a girl
who had herself proved guileful to the rest.
94 Alone he left her there, alone, with child.
That crime incurs for him this penalty
which also stands as vengeance for Medea.
97 Along with him go all who turned such tricks.
And that’s enough to know about this vale,
or else of those who’re caught within its fangs.’

100 We’d come already to the point at which
the tight path crosses with the second bank
and makes a shoulder to another arch.
103 And now we heard, from Pocket Number Two,
the groans and griping of another lot,
the snuﬄing of their snouts, their slapping palms.
106 The banks were crusted with a slime and mould
that rose up in porridgy exhalations
and, scuﬄing, violated eye and nose.
109 The bottom of that pit goes down so deep
we saw it only when we climbed the ridge
and stood to see the rock rise straight above.
112 Reaching that point and looking down, we saw
that all of them were plunged in diarrhoea
ﬂowing, it seemed, from human cubicles.
115 And while my eyes were searching deep within,
I noticed one whose head was foul with shit.
Had he the tonsure? It was hard to tell.
118 But he screamed out at me: ‘Why gawp like that,
so hungry-eyed for me and not the other swill?’
‘Because,’ I said, ‘if I remember well,
121* I’ve seen you once before, with drier coiﬀure.
You are from Lucca. Alessio Interminei.
And that is why I’ve got my eye on you.’
124 He answered (battering his turnip top):
‘I’m sunk this deep because of ﬂatteries –
none were too sickly for my tongue to speak.’
127 When that was done, my leader now went on:
‘Just poke your nose a little further out.
Your eyes may then be able to detect
130 a slut down there – ﬁlthy, with tangled hair,
scratting herself with cacky ﬁngernails,
squatting at one time, upright at the next.
133* Thais! She’s there, the whore, the one who cooed
to her hot panting swain (“Yeees! Good for you?”), “Angel,
a miracle! My thanks indeed!”

136 Let that be all that here we need to view.’

CANTO 19

1* You! Magic Simon, and your sorry school!
Things that are God’s own – things that, truly, are the
brides of goodness – lusting cruelly
4* after gold and silver, you turn them all to whores.
The trumpet now (and rightly!) sounds for you.
There you all are, well set in Pocket Three.
7 Onwards towards this yawning tomb, mounting
the ridge, by now we’d reached its summit –
the point that plumbs the middle of the ditch.
10 O wisdom in the height, how great the art
that you display in Heaven, on earth and even
in that evil world! How justly you deal power!
13 I saw how all the livid rock was drilled
with holes – along its ﬂanks, across its ﬂoor –
all circular, and all of equal measure.
16* To me they seemed, in radius, no more nor less
than fonts that, in my own beloved Saint John’s,
allow the priest at baptisms a place to stand.
19 (Not long ago, I shattered one of those.
Someone was drowning there. I got them out.
This, sealed and sworn, is nothing but the truth.) 22 Out of
the mouth of every single hole
there ﬂoated up a pair of sinner feet,
legs to the ham on show, the rest concealed.
25 The soles of all these feet were set alight,
and each pair wriggled at the joint so hard
they’d easily have ripped a rope or lanyard.

28 As ﬂames go ﬂickering round some greasy thing
and hover just above its outer rind,
so these ﬂames also, toe tip to heel end.
31 ‘Who, sir,’ I said, ‘is that one there? That one
who jerks in pain far greater than his cònfreres ,
sucked at by ﬂames more ﬁercely vermilion.’
34 ‘I’ll lift you down,’ he answered me, ‘if you
insist. We’ll take that bank the easier.
He’ll talk to you himself about his twists.’
37 ‘Whatever pleases you,’ I said, ‘to me is good.
Lord, you remain: I’ll not depart – you know –
from what you will. You read my silent thoughts.’
40 So on we went to the fourth embankment.
We turned around, descended on our left,
arriving at that pitted, straitened ﬂoor.
43 My teacher, kindly, did not set me down –
nor loose me from his hip hold – till we’d reached that
ﬁssure where (all tears) shanks shuddered.
46* ‘Whatever you might be there, upside down,
staked, you unhappy spirit, like a pole,
if you,’ I said, ‘are able, then speak out.’
49 So there I stood like any friar who shrives
the hired assassin – head down in the earth –
who calls him back to put oﬀ stiﬂing death.
52* And he yelled out: ‘Is that you standing there?
Are you there, on your feet still, Boniface?
The writings lied to me by quite some years.
55 Are you so sick of owning things already?
Till now, you’ve hardly been afraid to cheat
our lovely woman, tearing her to shreds.’
58 Well, I just stood there (you will know just how)
simply not getting what I’d heard come out,
feeling a fool, uncertain what to say.
61 Then Virgil entered: ‘Say this – and make speed:
“No, that’s not me. I am not who you think.” ‘
And so I answered as he’d said I should.

64 At which – all feet – the spirit thrashed about,
then, sighing loudly in a tearful voice:
‘So what is it you want of me?’ he said.
67 ‘If you’re so keen to know who I might be,
and ran all down that slope to ﬁnd me out,
you’d better know I wore the papal cope.
70 A true Orsini, son of Ursa Bear,
I showed such greed in favouring her brats
that – up there well in pocket – I’m in pocket here.
73 Below me, in great stacks beneath my head,
packed tight in every cranny of the rock,
are all my antecedents in the Simon line.
76 Down there I’ll sink, in that same way, when he
arrives whom I supposed that you might be,
and uttered, therefore, my abrupt inquiry.
79 But I already – feet up on the grill, tossed
upside down – have passed more time
than Boniface yet will, stuck here with red hot toes.
82* For after him from westwards there’ll appear
that lawless shepherd, uglier in deed,
who then, for both of us, will form a lid.
85 He shall be known as a “Jason-Once-Again”.
We read in Maccabees: “Priest Bribes a King.”
This other will score well with one French prince.’
88 I may have been plain mad. I do not know.
But now, in measured verse, I sang these words:
‘Tell me, I pray: what riches did Our Lord
91 demand, as ﬁrst instalment, from Saint Peter
before He placed the keys in his command?
He asked (be sure) no more than: “Come behind me.”
94 Nor did Saint Peter, or the rest of them,
receive from Matthias a gold or silver piece,
allotting him the place that Judas lost.
97* So you stay put. You merit punishment.
But keep your eye on that ill-gotten coin
that made you bold with Charles the Angevin.

100 And, were I not forbidden, as I am,
by reverence for those keys, supreme and holy,
that you hung on to in the happy life,
103 I now would bring still weightier words to bear.
You and your greed bring misery to the world,
trampling the good and raising up the wicked.
106* Saint John took heed of shepherds such as you.
He saw revealed that She-above-the-Waves,
whoring it up with Rulers of the earth,
109 she who in truth was born with seven heads
and fed herself, in truth, from ten pure horns,
as long as she in virtue pleased her man.
112 Silver and gold you have made your god. And what’s
the odds – you and some idol-worshipper?
He prays to one, you to a gilded hundred.
115* What harm you mothered, Emperor Constantine!
Not your conversion but the dowry he –
that ﬁrst rich Papa – thus obtained from you!’
118 And all the time I chanted out these notes,
he, in his wrath or bitten by remorse,
ﬂapped, with great force, the ﬂat of both his feet.
121 My leader, I believe, was very pleased.
In listening to these sounding words of truth,
he stood there satisﬁed, his lips compressed.
124 So, too, he took me up in his embrace.
Then, bodily, he clasped me to his breast
and climbed again the path where he’d come down.
127 Nor did he tire of holding me so tight.
He bore me to the summit of that arch
spanning the banks of Pockets Four and Five.
130 And there he gently put his burden down,
gently on rocks so craggy and so steep
they might have seemed to goats too hard to cross.
133 From there, another valley was disclosed.

CANTO 20

1 I now must turn a strange new pain to verse
and give some substance to this twentieth chant
that deals (Cantica 1) with sunken souls.
4 Already I had set myself to peer
intently on those now-discovered depths,
washed as they were with agonizing tears.
7 I saw there people circling round that trench.
And on they came in silence, weeping still –
as slow in pace as litanies on earth.
10 Then, as my gaze sank lower down these forms,
each was revealed (the wonder of it all!)
twisted around between the chin and thorax.
13 The face of each looked down towards its coccyx.
And each, deprived of vision to the front,
came, as it must, reversed along its way.
16 Seized by some paralytic ﬁt, others,
perhaps, have been so turned awry. But I –
not having seen, myself – don’t credit it.
19 That God may grant you, as you read, the fruit
that you deserve in reading, think, yourselves:
could I have kept my own face dry, to see,
22* close by, that image of our human self
so wrenched from true that teardrops from the eyes
ran down to rinse them where the buttocks cleave?
25* Of this, be sure: that, leaning on a spur
of that unyielding cliﬀ, I wept. ‘Are you,’
my escort said, ‘like them, an idiot still?

28 Here pity lives where pity’s truth is dead.
Who is more impious, more scarred with sin
than one who pleads compassion at God’s throne?
31* Lift up your head! Stand straight. See, that one there?
Under his chariot wheels, the earth yawned wide;
and Thebes – all eyes – yelled: “Where, Amphiaraus, 34
headlong away? Why leave us in this strife?”
Into the ceaseless void he fell, until
he came where Minos stands, who seizes all.
37 He’s formed his chest – amazingly – from shoulder.
As once he wished to see too far ahead,
his tread is backward, and he stares to rear.
40* See there Tiresias! Male-to-female switch.
His looks, mutating, were entirely changed,
his members altering till each was each.
43 And then, to win once more his virile plumes,
he needs must strike a second time, and shake
again at coupling snakes his witch’s wand.
46 Then, spine to gut, the prophet Arruns comes.
High in the Lunigiana hills – over
Carrara homesteads, so hard-hoed by serfs –
49 he found a grotto in the marble cliﬀs
and took this for his dwelling place. Nothing,
from there, cuts oﬀ the view of sea or star.
52* And then there’s one whose breasts you cannot see
(since these are mantled by her ﬂowing strands)
who shows on that side all her shaggy ﬂeece.
55 She, once, was Manto, scouring many lands,
until she reached and settled at my birthplace.
And so – to please me – listen for a while.
58 Her father, having left this life – and Thebes,
the place of Bacchus, being now in thrall –
for years she travelled, searching through this world.
61* Above, in lovely Italy, there lies a lake
(in Latin: Benacus) beneath those Alps
that lock out Germany beyond the high Tyrol.

64 From waters gathered in that standing pool
a thousand springs, I think, or more, refresh
the lands between those peaks, Camonica and Garda.
67 There is a place, the central point of these,
where pastors – if they choose to sail from Brescia, from
Verona and from Trent – have power to bless.
70 Here that brave citadel Peschiera sits,
built where the shoreline sinks to reach a low,
boldly outfacing Bergamese and Brescians.
73 Cascading from the lap of Benacus,
waters, unstayably, must run down here.
Through lush green meadows these all form a stream.
76 And this, when it begins to run, is known
by name as Mincio, not Benacus.
(It meets the river Po around Govérnolo.)
79 Moving, the Mincio at once dips down,
then, broadening in the plain, it forms a marsh –
and this in summer can be foul and brackish.
82 Manto, that bitter virgin, passing by,
saw, in the centre of that great morass,
a place unploughed and bare of population.
85 There, ﬂeeing still from human fellowship,
she settled with her vassals, plied her arts,
in this place lived, here left her empty corpse.
88 Then other peoples came who had, so long,
been scattered all about. Because the marsh
surrounded it, the site was safe and strong.
91 They raised their city over those dead bones.
They called it Mantua (no magic charm!),
since Manto ﬁrst had made the place her own.
94 Those living there were once more numerous,
before the idiotic Casalodi was
so taken in by Pinamonte’s trick.
97 So, if in other stories you should hear
some tale of how my city came to be,
don’t let the truth, I urge, be mocked by lies.’

100 ‘Sir,’ I replied, ‘to me your words are sure,
and capture so entirely what I think,
that diﬀering versions are as burned-out coal.
103 But let me know some more of this parade,
that is, if any here still merit note.
My mind is waiting only for that word.’
106* And so he said: ‘The one who there fans wide
his beard from cheek to shadowed shoulderblade,
was – in those years when Greece was void of men,
109 when, even in the cradle, boys were few –
an augur. He, with Calchas, cast the hour
at which to cut the anchor rope in Aulis.
112 By name Eurypylus, there is some verse
in my great tragedy that sings of him.
But you’ll know where. You know the whole thing through.
115* And then we meet, so withered in his ﬂanks,
a certain Scotsman, Michael. In the spheres
of fraud and magic, he was full of pranks.
118* There’s Guido Bonatti. Look! Asdente, too!
The cobbler must be wishing now he’d stuck
to thread and leathers. Too late to repent.
121 Then see those hags? They, one and all, forsook
for witchcraft distaﬀ, needle, pin and spool.
They cast their spells with weeds and ju-ju dolls.
124* But come, now come. The zone where hemispheres
both meet by now is gripped (and, under
Seville, waves are touched) by Cain, his bush and thorns.
127 And yestere’en the rounding moon was full.
You must remember this. It shone while you,
unharmed, were deep within that ﬁrst dark wood.’
130 And so he chatted on and we fared forwards.

CANTO 21

1 So on we went from bridge to bridge, speaking
of things that I shan’t, in my comedy,
commit to song. We gained the brow. Once there,
4 we paused and, down in Rottenpockets, saw
another ﬁssure still, more empty tears.
I saw it all – a marvel of mere dark.
7* Compare: Venetians in their Arsenal,
in winter when their ships cannot set sail,
brew up a viscous pitch which they then smear
10 on ailing boards, or else lay down new hulls.
Others will plug the ribs of hulks that have,
by now, made many a long-haul trip.
13 Some hammer at the prow, some at the poop,
some whittle oars, where others plait the rig.
Some mend the mainsail, others patch the jib.
16 So here – though more by art of God than ﬁre –
a dense black gunge was brought to boiling point,
and splashed on all the banks in sticky smears.
19 I saw this stuﬀ but nothing else within
but bubbles as the boiling bubbled on,
swelling to roundness, glue-ily sinking in.
22 In mesmerized amazement I just gazed.
But then, ‘Look out! Look out!’ my leader cried,
then dragged me, where I’d stood, towards his side.
25 And there I turned as one who may well pause –
all swagger, in his sudden panic, gone –
to peep at what he really ought to ﬂee,

28 yet, glimpsing this, does not delay his parting.
I saw there, right behind us, this black demon
running the ridge around in our direction.
31 Eek! How ferocious all his features looked.
How viciously his every move seemed etched,
wings wide apart, so lithe and light of foot.
34 The hunch blades of his shoulders, keen and proud,
bore up the haunches of some criminal,
his hook ﬁxed ﬁrm in tendons at each heel.
37* Mounting our bridge, demonically he barked:
‘Get this, Rotklors! A boss man from Lucca!
You lot can dunk him. I’ll get back for more.
40 I’ve got it stuﬀed, Saint Zita’s place, with this sort.
They’re at it there, the lot. (Oh! Not Bonturo!)
Cash on the nail, and “no” becomes “for sure”.’
43 Dumping his load, he then dashed down
and crossed the ﬂinty slope. No mad bullmastiﬀ
ever was loosed so fast to catch a thief.
46 The sinner dived, but then turned, writhing up.
At which the demons, dossing by that bridge,
yelled: ‘No place, black face, here for black-faced gods.
49 You can’t swim here like bathers in the Serchio.
If you don’t want to know what hooks can do,
then just don’t poke your nose above that tar.’
52 They sank in him a hundred barbs or more.
‘Down here,’ they sang, ‘you’ll tango in the dark!
Get under cover! Pull what scams you can!’
55 Chefs do the same. They get their kitchen boys
to fork the centre of a simmering pot,
so chunks of meat do not ﬂoat up too high.
58 Here, too. ‘Seem not to be here,’ Sir now said.
‘Just hunker down behind a spur of rock.
It may still oﬀer you some place to hide.
61 Yet have no fear. Oppose me as they may,
my strategy – I know what’s what – is clear.
I’ve been involved in rucks like this before.’

64 So now, beyond the bridge head, on he went,
and needed, when he neared Embankment Six,
the steadiest front that he could summon up.
67 With all the fury and tempestuous rage
of dog packs rushing on some poor old tramp –
who freezes there and pleads from where he’d reached –
70 so now those demons underneath the arch
stormed out at him and brandished all their hooks.
But he cried out: ‘Don’t even think of it.
73 Before you set on me with curving prongs,
let one of you who’ll hear me out draw near,
and then discuss if hooking me is right or wrong.’
76 So, ‘Go on, Rottentail,’ they shrieked. ‘That’s you!’
And he advanced (the others kept their ground
and muttered: ‘What will he get out of it?’)
79 ‘Do you imagine, Rottentail,’ my teacher said,
‘who’ve seen me come already once, immune
to all your tricks, that I am here without
82 the favouring aid of fate or will divine?
Let us pass on. For Heaven wills that I
should guide another on the savage way.’
85 His arrogance at this took such a fall
he let his hook slip, dangling, to his heels.
‘OK,’ he told the others, ‘let’s not cut him.’
88 And now my leader turned and said: ‘O thou
who sittest there, squatting by that splintered bridge,
return to me with conﬁdence renewed.’
91 So shift I did, and reached him speedily.
At which the demons all came pressing forwards –
so I could not be sure they’d keep their word.
94* In this way, at Caprona once I saw
the infantry come edging out, despite
safe conduct, chary of the hordes around.
97 Huddled against my leader’s side, pressed hard
along him, head to toe, I could not wrench
my eyes from them. Their looks did not look good.

100 They cocked their barbs. Then one spoke out:
‘Want me to touch him on his fat backside?’
And they replied: ‘Yeah, get him in the notch.’
103 But then that devil who was still in speech
with my great leader swung around at speed,
and said: ‘Just cool it, cool it, Tangletop!’
106 ‘Further along this crag,’ he now declared,
‘you just can’t go. Bridge Six is broken down.
It lies in ruins on the valley ﬂoor.
109 But if you’d care to schlepp still further on,
then do so round this arching cliﬀ. Nearby,
another outcrop makes a path for you.
112* Just yesterday (ﬁve hours ahead of now),
a thousand years, two centuries and sixty-six
from when the path was cut had then elapsed.
115 I’ll send in that direction some of mine,
to watch for any sinner scenting air.
You go with them. They won’t dare pull a stunt.’
118* ‘So, forward, Crackice! Forward, Flash Ali!’
so he began: ‘And Baddog! You as well.
And you, old Twirlitufts, can lead the squad.
121 Loveslot as well. And you, too, Dragonrunt,
Bigpig with tusks, and also Skratcherker,
Flutterby! For’ard! And you there, mad Glogob!
124 Search all around this pan of boiling lime:
until you reach the spur that arcs, unbroken,
over these dens, these two will go unharmed.’
127 ‘Sir, sir,’ I said, ‘what’s this I see! Please, sir,
if you know how and where, let’s go alone.
Myself, I didn’t ask for this at all.
130 Your eyes are usually so very keen.
Can you not see? Just look! They grind their teeth.
Their frowns are warnings of what harm they mean.’
133 His answer was: ‘I wouldn’t have you frightened.
Let them scowl so, and grind as they may choose.
They mean it for the souls in this sad stew.’

136 About-face, leftwards on the rocky pass,
each poked a tongue, teeth clenched, towards their lord,
and he – to give the order now, ‘Quick march!’ – 139 in
answer made a trumpet of his arse.

CANTO 22

1 I, in my time, have seen brave knights strike camp,
parade their power, launch an attack, and then,
at times, to save their skins, desert the ﬁeld.
4* Yes, you, Aretines, I have seen our cavalry
charge through your heartland. Skirmishes I’ve seen, cutand-thrust tournaments and running duels,
7* all to the sound of horns (at times) or bells,
to beating drums or signals ﬂashed from ramparts,
devices of our own and more exotic signs.
10 Yet never to so weird a pipe or whistle
have I, till now, seen foot or horse fall in,
nor ship set sail to signs like that, from land or star.
13 So, on we went, ﬁve friends on either side.
What fearsome company! Well, that’s the way it is:
hobnob in church with saints, in pubs with sots.
16 The tar pit called for all my concentration
to note each facet of this rotten hole,
and also of the persons burning there.
19 As schools of dolphin when they arch their spines
provide a signal to the mariner,
to say the ship should soon be steered back home, 22 so
too from time to time, to ease their pain,
a sinner gave his back some air, then quick
as any lightning ﬂash would hide again.
25 Likewise, in ditches at the water’s edge,
bullfrogs will stand, their snouts alone on show, their feet
concealed, with all their bulk below.

28 In this same way, these sinners lolled around.
But then, whenever Twirlitufts came past,
they swiftly dived beneath the bubbling crust.
31 I saw – at this, my heart still skips a beat –
that one (as happens when a frog school springs,
but one stays dallying) was left behind.
34 And Skratcherker – as being nearest to him –
enmeshed his hook among those tar-caked locks
and yanked him out like any ﬂoppy otter.
37 I knew them all by name, the lot of them.
I’d noted each when they were ﬁrst enrolled,
and then, between them, heard them call out names.
40 ‘Get in there, Glogob! Get him with your hook!’
(So, in damned unison, the chorus shrieked.)
‘And tear the leather oﬀ his ugly rump!’
43* I turned, and to my master said: ‘Find out,
if you can manage it: who is that so-and-so
who’s fallen foul of these antagonists?’
46 My leader went, and stood beside him there,
wanting to know the place where he was born.
He answered: ‘I’m a native of Navarre.
49 My mother, having borne me to a lout,
who brought himself and all he had to ruin,
engaged me to the service of a nobleman.
52 And then I joined King Thibaut’s retinue,
to practise arts of chartered bribery.
For which I pay my dues in this great heat.’
55 Then Bigpig, with his boar-like jowls – a tusk
stuck out from both his cheeks – supplied a sip
of how well one of these could rake and rip.
58 The mouse had got among the bad cats now.
But Twirlitufts enclosed him in his arms.
‘Stay over there!’ he said. ‘I’ll keep him pinned.’
61 He tilted up his face towards my guide:
‘Go on, then. Ask him, if you want still more.
But quick,’ he said, ‘before they do him in.’

64 ‘So tell me, then,’ my master now went on,
‘among the criminals beneath the tar,
are any – can you tell? – Italian?’ ‘Just now,’
67 he answered me, ‘I left a man from there.
If only I were with him still beneath the lid,
I wouldn’t need to dread these hooks and claws.’
70 ‘We’ve taken quite enough of this!’ So said
the Loveslot. Skewering an arm, he sliced
a muscle out in one long hookful.
73 Then Dragonrunt must also have a go.
He ogled the ham. But their decurion
swung round and gave them all a ﬁlthy frown.
76 Then, just a little, they all settled down.
The sinner lay there, wondering at his wound.
My lord without delay now turned and asked:
79* ‘Who was the one from whom, you say, you took,
ill-fatedly, your leave to reach this shore?’
‘Brother – as was – Gomita!’ he replied.
82 ‘Sard from Gallura, vessel of deceit!
Palming (well-greased) his sire’s worst enemies,
he treated all so well, each sang his praise.
85 He took their cash, then let them oﬀ the hook.
In this – as he’ll admit – and everything
a total crook. Not small time, though. The King!
88 Don Michael Zanche, from the Logudor,
still hangs around with him. Their tongues don’t tire of
banging on about “Sardin-i-ah”.
91 Ow! Look at how that demon grinds his teeth.
I could tell more but (oh! I’m terriﬁed!)
he means to come and give my scabs a scrub!’
94 The high commander swung on Flutterby,
whose moon eyes popped in eagerness to pounce.
‘Butt out!’ he hissed. ‘You vulture! Over there!’
97 Witless with fear, he started once again:
‘If you would witness or hold audience
with Lombards or Tuscans, I can make them come.

100 But let these Rotklors all stand well aside –
and no one need be frightened they’ll attack –
while I, just sitting on this self-same spot,
103 will whistle. Now I’m here alone. Presto!
And now we’re seven! That’s our usual trick
when any from below gets out of it.’
106 Hearing this blag, old Baddog twitched his snout,
then shook his head and snarled: ‘The little demon!
He means to take a dive and get back in.’
109 That sinner up his sleeve had snares galore.
‘O yeah! That’s me,’ he said. ‘A demon! Sure!
Really? You think I’d bring my gang more grief?’
112 Flash Ali, at these words, could not hold back.
Despite what his companions thought, ‘Go on,’
he said. ‘Slope oﬀ. I’ll not come galloping.
115 I will, though, stretch my wings across the pitch.
Let’s leave the ridge. Let’s make the slope our screen.
And then we’ll see if you can get oﬀ clean.’
118* O you there, as you read! Get this! Olympics!
They all then turned to face the other bank,
even the one who ﬁrst was most reluctant.
121 The Navarrese chose his moment well.
Feet ﬁrmly planted, in a single ﬂash,
he’d leapt and gone, scot-free of their intent.
124 At this, the lot of them were pierced by guilt.
Yet, undeterred, the devil most at fault
drove onwards. ‘Now you’re for it!’ he yelled out.
127 To no avail. No wing could overhaul
the speed of fear. The sinner plunged. Square on, the
demon baulked and then shot up again.
130 So, too, a rapid duck dives down, glimpsing
a falcon closing in. The duck’s foe then
returns aloft, bitter in thwarted pique.
133 Crackice, still seething at the doublecross,
zoomed ever onwards in his yen to see
the sinner free – then mix it with Flash Ali.

136 So, since the barrator had long since gone,
he turned his talons on his own best mate.
Above the ditch he locked him in his prongs.
139 The other, though, a right old sparrowhawk,
returned the hook. And so the two of them,
as one, went tumbling to the boiling pond.
142 The heat that instant made them come unhitched.
But, even so, they couldn’t raise a thing,
so tightly glued together were their wings.
145 Then Twirlitufts, condoling with his kin,
sent four of them towards the inner rim,
with all their grappling tackle, at top speed.
148 This side and that they went to take their posts,
and bent their hooks towards those two, stuck fast.
By now they both were crisped within the batter.
151 With that entanglement, we left the matter.

CANTO 23

1 Silent, alone with no one now beside us,
we went our way – the one behind, the other
leading on – walking as meek Franciscans do.
4* My mind turned (thinking of that scuﬄe still)
to Aesop and his fables, most of all
the one about the frog and rat and hawk.
7* For ‘now’ and ‘noo’ are hardly more alike
than this ﬁne mess to that – if parallels
are rightly drawn between the start and ﬁnish.
10 But thoughts pop up and then lead on to more.
So from this ﬁrst a further set was born,
which now redoubled all my earlier fears.
13 ‘Because of us,’ the sequence ran, ‘that lot
have been so injured, put on, tricked and scorned, they
cannot fail, I think, to be upset.
16 Suppose their bile gets tangled now with anger,
then surely they’ll come after us and snarl
more viciously than dogs that snout a hare.’
19 I felt already that my every curl
was bristling, on its end. So, gazing back,
stock still, I said: ‘If you, sir, do not hide
22 yourself this second, me as well…I dread
the Rotklors gang. They’re not now far behind.
I hear them now, imagine it, quite clear.’
25 ‘If I,’ he said, ‘were leaded mirror glass,
I could not make your outer image mine
more swiftly than I grasp your inward stress.

28 Your thoughts just now came in upon my own,
in bearing similar, and look as well.
These, all together, formed a single plan.
31 Suppose that, on the right, the incline’s such
that we can reach the pocket there beyond,
we shall elude the hunt we now imagine.’
34 No sooner had he oﬀered up this thought
than, coming after us, I saw them, wings
stretched wide, now closer, meaning to get us.
37 My leader in an instant caught me up.
A mother, likewise, wakened by some noise,
who sees the ﬂames – and sees them burning closer – 40
will snatch her son and ﬂee and will not pause,
caring less keenly for herself than him,
to pull her shift or undershirt around her.
43 Down from the collar of that circling rock,
backwards he launched himself, and met the slope that
forms a bung against the other trench.
46 No mill race ever ran through any sluice
at such velocity, or streamed to meet
the scoops that drive, on land, the grinding stone, 49 as
now my master slithered down that verge,
bearing me with him, bound upon his breast,
as though I were his son and no mere friend.
52 And hardly had his feet touched down to meet
the pocket ﬂoor than those were at the summit,
over us. We need have had no worries.
55 For that exalted providence that chose
such ministers to guard Ditch Five also
deprived them of the power to ever leave.
58 We found, down there, a people painted bright.
Their tread, as round they went, was very slow,
weeping, worn down and seemingly defeated.
61* They all wore robes with hoods hung low, that hid
their eyes, tailored – in cut – to match those worn by
monks who thrive in Benedictine Cluny.

64* So gilded outwardly, they dazed the eye.
Within, these robes were all of lead – so heavy
those capes that melt in torture would have seemed mere
straw.
67 What labour to eternity to wear such dress!
We took once more the leftward path along
with them, intent on their distress and tears.
70 Because, though, of the labouring weight they bore,
these weary folk came on so slow that we,
at every hip swing, joined new company.
73 ‘Do all you can’ – I put this to my guide –
‘to ﬁnd here someone known by name or deed.
As we move onward, scan around to see.’
76 Then one who’d recognized my Tuscan words
from close behind yelled out: ‘You! Racing there through
all this murky air, just ease your stride.
79 You’ll get, perhaps, from me what you desire.’
At this my leader turned. And, ‘Wait,’ he said,
‘then follow forwards at the pace he sets.’
82 I stopped and saw there two who, from their look,
(though hampered by their load and narrow footings) in
mind were speeding on to reach my side.
85 At last, they caught me up. With eyes a-squint,
they gazed at me in wonder, spoke no word,
till muttering they turned and, each to each:
88 ‘This one, it seems – Just see his throat! It ﬂicks! –
is still alive. If dead, why favoured so,
to go uncovered by a weighty cloak?’
91 And then to me direct they said: ‘Tuscan,
you’ve reached the college of the hypocrites.
Do not disdain to say who you might be.’
94 ‘Born,’ I replied, ‘by the lovely Arno,
grown in the city that adorns its banks,
I still am in the limbs I’ve always worn.
97 But who are you, in whom, as I can see,
great pain distils such tears upon your cheeks?

What punishment strikes out these sparks from you?’
100 And one replied to me: ‘These orange robes
are thick with such a quantity of lead,
the weight of them would make a balance creak.
103* We’re good-time friars, Bolognese both.
Our names? I’m Catalano. Loderingo’s there,
captured together in that town of yours –
106 although, by custom, there is one alone
whose mandate is to keep the peace. Our doings
still appear around the Watch, for such we were.’
109 I then began: ‘O brothers! All the harm that you…’
but said no more. Straight to my sight, there sped one
cruciﬁed. Three staves ﬁxed him to earth.
112 And he, on seeing me, writhed all around
and ﬂuﬀed his beard up with the sighs he heaved.
Then brother Catalan, who saw all this,
115* revealed to me: ‘This ﬁgure, staked, whom you
so wonder at, advised the Pharisees
that one man suﬀer for the sake of all.
118 Across the road, stretched naked, as you see,
he ﬁrst must feel, whoever passes by,
the toiling weight of those who come this way.
121 Here too lies Annas – father of his wife –
racked in this ditch with others of that house
that proved an evil seed bed for the Jews.’
124 Virgil, I saw, just stood there marvelling,
bending above that ﬁgure on the cross,
eternally in ignominious exile.
127 But then, towards the friar he voiced: ‘Please say
(though not to trouble you), if you’re allowed,
is there some outlet lying to the right
130 through which the two of us can make our way
without the need to call black angels here,
who might come down to further our departure?’
133 ‘Far sooner than you hope,’ the answer was,
‘we’ll near a rock that, jutting from the Ring,

vaults over all these savage valley ﬂoors –
136 except it’s broken here and forms no covering.
You can, though, clamber up the ruined side.
The slope is gentle and the base piled high.’
139 My leader stood a moment, head hung down.
And then he said: ‘He gave a false account,
that hooker-up of sinners over there.’
142 ‘I, in Bologna,’ so the friar said, ‘have heard
a good few stories told of devil vice,
not least “Old Nick’s a liar – falsehood’s dad”.’
145 At this, with lengthened pace, my lord strode oﬀ,
clear signs of anger ﬂitting on his face.
And so I left these beings with their loads
148 to follow in the prints of his dear feet.

CANTO 24

1* In that still baby-boyish time of year,
when sunlight chills its curls beneath Aquarius, when
nights grow shorter equalling the day,
4 and hoar frost writes fair copies on the ground
to mimic in design its snowy sister
(its pen, though, not chill-tempered to endure), 7 the
peasant in this season, when supplies
run short, rolls from his bed, looks out and sees the ﬁelds
are glistening white, so slaps his thigh, 10 goes in, then
grumbles up and down, as though
(poor sod) he couldn’t ﬁnd a thing to do,
till, out once more, he ﬁlls his wicker trug,
13 with hope, at least. No time at all! The features
of the world transform. He grabs his goad.
Outdoors, he prods his lambs to open pasture.
16 In some such way, I too was ﬁrst dismayed
to see distress so written on my leader’s brow.
But he, as quickly, plastered up the hurt.
19 And so, arriving at the ruined bridge,
my leader turned that sour-sweet look on me
that ﬁrst he’d shown me at the mountain foot.
22 He spread his arms, then, having in his thought
surveyed the landslip, and (a man of sense)
assessed it well, he took me in his grip.
25 Then, always with adjustments in his moves
(so that, it seemed, he foresaw everything),
in hauling me towards the pinnacle

28 of one moraine, he’d see a spur beyond
and say: ‘Next, take your hold on that niche there.
But test it ﬁrst to see how well it bears.’
31 This was no route for someone warmly dressed.
Even for us – he, weightless, shoving me –
we hardly could progress from ledge to ledge.
34 Had not the gradient been less severe
than that which faced it on the other side,
I’d have been beat. I cannot speak for him.
37 But Rottenpockets slopes towards the ﬂap
that opens on the lowest sump of all,
and so, in contour, every ditch is shaped
40 with one rim proud, the other dipping down.
So, in the end, we came upon the point
where one last building block had sheared away.
43 My lungs by now had so been milked of breath
that, come so far, I couldn’t make it further.
I ﬂopped, in fact, when we arrived, just there.
46 ‘Now you must needs,’ my teacher said, ‘shake oﬀ
your wonted indolence. No fame is won
beneath the quilt or sunk in feather cushions.
49* Whoever, fameless, wastes his life away,
leaves of himself no greater mark on earth
than smoke in air or froth upon the wave.
52 So upwards! On! And vanquish laboured breath!
In any battle mind-power will prevail,
unless the weight of body loads it down.
55* There’s yet a longer ladder you must scale.
You can’t just turn and leave all these behind.
You understand? Well, make my words avail.’
58 So up I got, pretending to more puﬀ
than, really, I could feel I’d got within.
‘Let’s go,’ I answered, ‘I’m all strength and dash.’
61 Upwards we made our way, along the cliﬀ –
poor, narrow-going where the rocks jut out,
far steeper than the slope had been before.

64 Talking (to seem less feeble) on I went,
when, issuing from the ditch beyond, there came
a voice – though one unﬁt for human words.
67 I made no sense of it. But now I neared
the arch that forms a span across that pocket.
The speaker seemed much moved by raging ire.
70 Downwards I bent. But in such dark as that,
no eye alive could penetrate the depths.
But, ‘Sir,’ I said, ‘make for the other edge,
73 and let us then descend the pocket wall.
From here I hear but do not understand.
So, too, I see, yet focus not at all.’
76 ‘I oﬀer you,’ he said to me, ‘no answer
save “just do it”. Noble demands, by right,
deserve the consequence of silent deeds.’
79 So where the bridgehead meets Embankment Eight
we then went down, pursuing our descent,
so all that pocket was displayed to me.
82 And there I came to see a dreadful brood
of writhing reptiles of such diverse kinds
the memory drains the very blood from me.
85 Let Libya boast – for all her sand – no more!
Engender as she may chelydri, pharae,
chenchres and amphisbaenae, jaculi,
88 never – and, yes, add Ethiopia, too,
with all, beyond the Red Sea, dry and waste –
has she displayed so many vicious pests.
91* And through all this abundance, bitter and grim,
in panic naked humans ran – no holes
to hide in here or heliotropic charms.
94 Behind their backs, the sinners’ hands were bound
by snakes. These sent both tail and neck between the
butts, then formed up front the ends in knots.
97 And near our point, at one of them (just look!)
a serpent headlong hurled itself and pierced
exactly at the knit of spine and nape.

100 Then, faster than you scribble ‘i’ or ‘o’,
that shape caught ﬁre, ﬂash-ﬂared and then (needs must)
descended in cascading showers of ash.
103 There, lying in destruction on the ground,
the dead dust gathered of its own accord,
becoming instantly the self it was.
106* Compare: the phoenix (as the sages say)
will come to its ﬁve-hundredth year, then die,
but then, on its own pyre, be born anew.
109 Its lifelong food is neither grass nor grain,
but nurture drawn from weeping balm and incense.
Its shroud, at last, is fume of nard and myrrh.
112 The sinner, ﬁrst, drops down as someone might
when grappled down, not knowing how, by demons
(or else some other epileptic turn),
115 who then, on rising, gazes all around,
bewildered by the overwhelming ill
that came just now upon him, sighing, staring.
118 So, too, this sinner, getting to his feet.
What power and might in God! How harsh it is!
How great the torrent of its vengeful blows!
121* My leader then demanded who he was.
‘I pelted down’ – the sinner, in reply –
‘to this wild gorge, right now, from Tuscany.
124 Beast living suited me, not human life,
the mule that once I was. I’m Johnny Fucci,
animal. Pistoia is my proper hole.’
127 I to my leader: ‘Tell him, “Don’t rush oﬀ!”
and make him say what guilt has thrust him down.
I’ve seen him. He’s a man of blood and wrath.’
130 The sinner, hearing this, made no pretence.
He ﬁxed on me a concentrated eye,
and coloured up in brash embarrassment.
133 ‘It pisses me right oﬀ,’ he then declared,
‘far more than being ripped away from life,
that you have got to see me in this misery.

136 I can’t say “no” to what you ask of me.
I’m stuck down here so deep ‘cos it was me,
the thief who nicked the silver from the sanctuary.
139 Then I just lied – to grass up someone else.
You won’t, however, laugh at seeing this.
If ever you return from these dark dives,
142* prick up your ears and hear my prophecy:
Pistoia ﬁrst will slim and lose its Blacks.
Then Florence, too, renews its laws and ranks.
145 Mars draws up ﬁreballs from the Val di Magra,
wrapped all around in clouds and turbulence.
And these, in acrid, ever-driven storms,
148 will battle high above the Picene acre.
A rapid bolt will rend the clouds apart,
and every single White be seared by wounds.
151 I tell you this. I want it all to hurt.’

CANTO 25

1* His words now reached their end. And then the robber
hoisted hands on high – a ﬁg-fuck formed in each – and
screamed: ‘Take that! I’m aiming, God, at you!’
4 From that point on, the serpents were my friends.
For one entwined its length around his neck
as if to say: ‘I’d have him speak no more.’
7 And then another bound his arms down tight,
and clinched itself so ﬁrmly round the front
he could not shake or shiver in either limb.
10* Pistoia! Ah! Pistoia! Why not take a stand?
Just burn yourself to blackened ash, and be
no more. Your seed succeeds in doing only ill.
13* In all of Hell, through every murky ring,
I saw no spirit facing God so proud,
even that king ﬂung down from Theban walls.
16 Away he ﬂed. He spake no further word.
And then there came, I saw, a wrathful centaur.
‘Where? Where is he,’ he called, ‘so sour and crude?’
19 Maremma, I should think – with all its swamps –
has fewer snakes than he. They writhed from rump
to where, on human features, lips begin.
22 Above its shoulders, stretched behind the nape,
there lay a dragon, wings extended wide.
And all it hits against, it sets on ﬁre.
25* ‘This centaur,’ so my teacher said, ‘is Cacus.
He is the one – so many times – who caused
a lake of gore to ﬂood the Aventine.

28 He does not tread the path his brethren take.
For spying, once, a mighty herd at hand,
he made it all his own by furtive fraud.
31 Beneath the mace of Hercules (that god
rained down a hundred blows, and he, perhaps,
felt ten, no more) his devious doings ceased.’
34 So Virgil spoke. The centaur sped away.
But now three spirits had approached beneath,
though neither of us noticed they were there
37 until they shouted out: ‘So who are you?’
Our story-telling pausing at this point,
we ﬁxed attention wholly on that trio.
40 Among the three was none I recognized.
And yet it chanced – as happens many times –
that one was forced to speak another’s name,
43* inquiring: ‘Where has Cianfa got to now?’
At which (to shut my leader up) I placed
a ﬁnger slantwise from my chin to nose.
46 If you are slow, my reader, to receive,
in faith, what I’ll say now – no miracle.
I saw it all, and yet can scarce believe.
49 While, eyebrows raised, I stared at these three men,
a reptile hurled itself with all six feet
at one, front on, and took a total hold.
52 It clenched the belly with its middle claws.
With each anterior it seized an arm.
It sank a forked fang deep in either cheek.
55 Along each loin it slithered out a leg,
then struck its tail between the two, to take,
now upwardly, a grip around the buttocks.
58 Ivy in tangles never barbed to tree
so tight as this ferocious awfulness,
linking its limbs in tendrils round that trunk.
61 As though the two were formed of warming wax,
each clung to each and, mingling in their hues,
neither now, seemingly, was what it was.

64 Like that, a ﬂame runs ﬂaring up a page
and, just ahead, goes ever-darkening tints,
not black as yet, and yet the white still dies.
67 The other two, at this, stared on. And each
moaned out: ‘Ohimé, Agnello, how you change!
Already, look, you’re neither two nor one.’
70 And yes, those two by now were both as one.
That is: the outlines of the two appeared
in one face only, two-ness lost and gone.
73 Two arms were fashioned out of four long strips.
Thorax and stomach, loins and thighs and hips
became such organs as you’ve never seen.
76 In each, the primal signs were all struck out.
Two yet not either, as it seemed, this sick
apparition. So, treading slow, it went its way.
79 The great green lizard, at the summer’s height,
lashed by a dog star rage from hedge to hedge,
crosses the path as though a lightning ﬂash.
82 So, paunch high (darting at the two, of three,
who still remained), inﬂamed and ﬁerce, there came a
snakelet, livid as a peppercorn.
85 This serpent pierced in one that spot where ﬁrst
we draw our nourishment, transﬁxing him.
It then fell back, stretched out before his face.
88 The one transﬁxed gazed down but spoke no word.
Rather, he yawned, his feet just planted there.
Sick sleep, it seemed, had struck him hard, or fever.
91 He eyed the snake. The reptile eyed him back.
Each gave out smoke in streams – the wound of one,
the serpent’s jaws. The smoke streams slowly met.
94* Lucan! Be silent now, and tell no more
your snaky tales of poor Sabellus and Nasidius.
Give ear to what the bow will now unleash.
97 Ovid, be silent! Less ‘Cadmus’ and ‘Arethusa’!
In turning verse, these two he may convert
to snake or stream. I do not envy him.

100 For he, through metamorphosis, did not
compose two species, glance on glance, whose forms
disposed themselves exchanging actual substance.
103 Each answered each in working through this rule:
the serpent fashioned (from his tail) a fork;
the wounded human dragged his footprints to.
106 The legs, now fastening at their inner thighs,
adhered so well that soon the join between
gave no clear sign of ever having been.
109 The cloven tail assumed the ﬁgure now
of that which, over there, was lost to view.
Hide softened here, but hardened over there.
112 I saw each arm retract and reach its pit.
The paws, conversely, of that stubby newt
lengthened as much as human feet grew short.
115 The hindmost toes then curled around and clinched;
these formed the member that a man conceals.
The other wretch wrenched his own part in two.
118 As now, around this pair, the fumes still hang,
a gauze of stranger colours – causing hair
to sprout fresh here, while there it plucks it sleek – 121
the one rose up, the other fell down ﬂat,
yet, peering out, as this snout changed for that,
neither could wrest from either evil eye beams.
124 Upright, the one dragged jowl across to temple.
And then, from leakages of surplus pulp,
a pair of ears appeared, on thinned-out jowls.
127 Whatever residue did not run back
now gelled, and gave that face its human nose.
The lips, plumped up to meet the need, gained bulk.
130 The other, lying ﬂat, extends his muzzle.
Then, just like snails when pulling in their horns, he draws
his ears back, ﬂush along his skull.
133 And now the tongue – once whole, and quick to speak –
divides in two. The other ﬁnds his fork
has closed right up. The furls of smoke now cease.

136* The soul, transmogriﬁed to fearful beast,
ﬂees – hissing, snuﬄing – oﬀ across the pit.
Spot on his track, the speaking presence spits.
139 And then he turns on him his novel back
to tell the third: ‘I’ll see slick Buoso go
as I did, bellyﬂop, around this track.’
142 Zymotic in the seventh bilge, I saw, then,
change and counterchange. My only plea, if here
my pen turns vain, must be sheer novelty.
145 And though my vision was a bit confused
(spirit quite drained of all its energies),
these souls could not so covertly pass by
148* that I should fail to see the cripple Puccio.
Of three companions who had ﬁrst come there,
he, all alone, escaped from alteration.
151 The last was him that you, Gaville, weep for.

CANTO 26

1* Rejoice, Florentia! You’ve grown so grand
that over land and sea you spread your beating wings,
and through the whole of Hell your name resounds.
4 Among those thieves and robbers there, I found,
were ﬁve of your own citizens. I am ashamed.
And you do not acquire, by this, great honour.
7* Yet if we dream, near dawn, of what is true,
then you, not long from now, will surely feel
what Prato aches to see for you – others, as well.
10 And were it now it would not be too soon.
Would it were so, as rightly it should be.
It weighs me down the more that time drags on.
13 We now moved oﬀ. And climbing by those stairs
that, going down, had bleached us ivory,
my leader, mounting up, pulled me along.
16 And so, proceeding on this lonely way
through splintered rocks and outcrops from the ridge, feet
without hands would not have gained advantage.
19 It grieved me then, it grieves me now once more,
to ﬁx my thoughts on what I witnessed there.
Now, more than usual, I must hold mind back,
22 lest brain should speed where virtue does not guide.
Thus if, by some propitious star (or more),
I’ve come to good, I’d best not make it void.
25 A farmer, leaning on his hillside, rests.
(It’s summer time, when he who lights the earth
least hides his face from us.) This countryman,

28 as now the ﬂy makes way for the mosquito,
sees there, below him on the valley ﬂoor,
(where he perhaps will plough and gather grapes)
31 glow-worms in numbers such as now I saw,
glittering around the dip of Pocket Eight,
when I arrived there, looking to its depths.
34* Compare, as also in the Book of Kings:
Elisha (once avenged by furious bears)
beheld Elijah’s chariot drawn away
37 by horses rising to the Heavens, straight.
His eye, unable to pursue, could see
only the ﬂame, like cloud whisp, rising high.
40 So, too, within the gullet of that ditch,
these ﬁres move round. None shows its thievery.
Yet each ﬁre stole some sinning soul away.
43 I stood there on the bridge and craned to look.
Indeed, had I not clutched a nearby rock,
I surely would (unpushed) have fallen in.
46* My leader, who had seen how hard I gazed,
informed me now: ‘In all these ﬁres are souls.
Each one is swaddled in its inward blaze.’
49 ‘Well, sir,’ I answered, ‘to be told by you,
I am, of course, the surer. Myself, though,
I’d already thought of that. I meant to ask:
52* “Who comes within that cloven-crested ﬂame
that seems to rise as from that pyre where, once, Eteocles
was laid beside a brother slain?” ‘
55 ‘Within this ﬂame,’ so he now said, ‘suﬀering,
are Ulysses and Diomed. As one, they face
their nemesis, as they in rage were one.
58 Within their ﬂame, the crime is now bewailed
of those whose cunning wrought the Trojan horse – the
door that freed the noble seed of Rome.
61 They mourn as well the ruse by which – though dead –
young Deidamia must weep Achilles’ loss.
They’re punished, too, for theft, of sacred statues.’

64 ‘If they, within those tongues of ﬁre, can speak,
I beg you, sir,’ I said, ‘and beg again –
so may each prayer be worth a thousand more –
67 that you do not forbid my waiting here
until that ﬂame with horns has come this way.
You see I bend to it with great desire.’
70 ‘Your prayer,’ he said, ‘is worthy of great praise,
and I, most willingly, accede to it.
But you must keep your tongue in tight control.
73* Leave me to speak. For I know very well
what you desire. Nor would these two be quick,
perhaps, to hear your words. They both are Greek.’
76 And when the ﬂame had reached, in time and place,
a point at which my leader thought it ﬁt,
I heard him form his utterances thus:
79 ‘O you there, two within a single ﬂame,
if I, when living, won, in your eyes, merit,
if merit, whether great or small, I won –
82 in penning my exalted lines of verse –
do not move on. Let one of you declare,
where, lost, he went, to come upon his death.’
85* The greater of those horns of ancient ﬂame
began to tear and waver, murmuring
as ﬁres will do when struggling in a wind.
88 Drawing its pinnacle this way and that,
as though this truly were a tongue that spoke,
it ﬂung its utterance out, declaring: ‘Once
91* I’d set my course from Circe (she had kept
me near Gaeta for a year or more,
before Aeneas, passing, named it that),
94 no tenderness for son, no duty owed
to ageing fatherhood, no love that should
have brought my wife Penelope delight,
97 could overcome in me my long desire,
burning to understand how this world works,
and know of human vices, worth and valour.

100* Out, then, across the open depths, I put to sea,
a single prow, and with me all my friends –
the little crew that had not yet abandoned me.
103 I saw both shorelines (one ran on to Spain,
the other to Morocco), Sardinia
and all those islands that our ocean bathes.
106 I and my company were old and slow.
And yet, arriving at that narrow sound
where Hercules had once set up his mark –
109 to warn that men should never pass beyond –
I left Seville behind me on the right.
To port already I had left Ceuta.
112 “Brothers,” I said, “a hundred thousand
perils you have passed and reached the Occident.
For us, so little time remains to keep
115 the vigil of our living sense. Do not
deny your will to win experience,
behind the sun, of worlds where no man dwells.
118 Hold clear in thought your seed and origin.
You were not made to live as mindless brutes,
but go in search of virtue and true knowledge.”
121 My men – attending to this little speech –
I made so keen to take the onward way
that even I could hardly have restrained them.
124 Wheeling our stern against the morning sun,
we made our oars our wings in crazy ﬂight,
then on, and always leftward making gain.
127 Now every star around the alien pole
I saw by night. Our own star sank so low
it never rose above the ocean ﬂoor.
130 Five times the light that shines beneath the moon
had ﬂared anew – and ﬁve times, too, grown dim – since
we had set our course on that high venture.
133 Ahead of us, a mountain now appeared,
darkened through distance, soaring (to my eyes)
higher by far than any ever seen.

136 We cheered for joy. This quickly turned to tears.
For now a wind was born from that new land.
Twisting, it struck at our forward timbers.
139 The waves and keel three times it swirled around.
And then a fourth. The afterdeck rose up,
the prow went down, as pleased Another’s will,
142 until once more the sea closed over us.’

CANTO 27

1 The ﬂame was upright now, and still. It meant
to say no more. And so (the poet gently
gave his leave) it went its way, away from us.
4 But close behind, another blaze came up,
and made us turn (a sound, confusedly,
had issued out) and glance towards its top.
7* Compare the Torture bull of Sicily.
This bellowed its inaugural – and justly so –
with wailings from the smith who’d ﬁled it smooth – 10
these bellows echoing its victim’s moans –
so that, although, in form mere hollow bronze,
it was, it seemed, transﬁxed with living pains.
13 So now those words which, dreadfully, could ﬁnd
no vent or outlet from their burning source,
were spoken in an accent of their own.
16 But when these sounds had made their way along,
and reached the tip which gave that ﬂick and twist that
tongues will give to any stream of air,
19* we heard: ‘You there! I square my words at you.
I heard you say – in Lombard tones – just now:
“Be out of it! I’ll rile on you no more.”
22 I’m here, perhaps belatedly. But you,
I hope, will not be loath to stay and speak.
You see how far from loath I am. And I burn!
25 If you have fallen even now to this
blind world, leaving the land of lovely Italy
(from which I carried any guilt I share),

28* tell me: Romagna – is it peace or war?
I was myself from those Urbino hills,
the mountain yoke that ﬁrst unlocks the Tiber.’
31 I held my head bowed low attentively,
until my leader lightly touched my side,
saying: ‘You speak. This one’s from Italy.’
34 And I, who had indeed got words prepared,
began without delay to speak to him:
‘You, then, below! The soul that’s hidden there!
37 Your dear Romagna (despots all the lot)
is not without, nor ever was, some war-at-heart.
On leaving, though, I saw no open conﬂict.
40 Ravenna stands as she has stood for years.
The Eagle, blazon of the Clan Polenta,
broods in her skies; its vanes hide even Cervia.
43 Forlì (her towers withstood that lengthy siege
that left a blood-stained pile of French invaders) goes ever
on beneath the green-clawed Lion.
46 The Mastiﬀs, old and young, of Fort Verucchio,
vicious in lordship over Lord Montagna,
still, as is usual, gnash and suck their bone.
49 And where Lamone and Santerno ﬂow,
the towns are schooled by Lion’s-Whelp-sur-Argent.
Summer to winter, north to south, he cants.
52 And then that place whose rim the Savio bathes –
between the mountain and the plain it lies;
it lives between high tyranny and freedom.
55 So, who are you? I beg you now to say.
If you still wish your name to brave the world, be no more
stiﬀ than others are with you.’
58 The ﬂame, as was its wont, ﬁrst roared a while.
Then, to and fro it writhed its pointed peak
and ﬁnally pronounced this speaking breath:
61 ‘Should I suppose, in answering, I spoke
to any person who should ever see
the world again, this ﬂame would shake no more.

64 But since, if all I hear is true, there’s none
who ever yet, alive, escaped these deeps,
I may reply without the fear of infamy.
67 I, once great warlord, was a friar next,
believing, bound by cord, I’d make amends.
And my beliefs would all have been assured,
70 had not there been (he’ll rot!) that sovereign priest
who won me, ﬁrmly, back to former sins.
Qua re and “how” I mean that you should hear.
73 While I was still, in form, such pulp and bone
as, ﬁrst, my mother gave to me, actions
of mine all favoured rather fox than lion.
76 Stratagems, wiles and covert operations –
I knew them all. These arts I so pursued
that word of me rang out throughout the world.
79 But when I recognized that now I’d come
to where we all in life ought, properly,
to furl our sail and take our rigging in,
82 whatever once had pleased me now annoyed.
I vowed – repentant, shriven – all obedience.
It might (what misery!) have worked out well.
85* The foremost lord of our new Pharisees,
who waged in Rome a war around the Lateran
(never, of course, with Jew or Saracen;
88 his foes were faithful Christians everyone;
none had been present at the fall of Acre,
none worked as trader in the Sultan’s souks),
91 did not, considering his own account,
consult his oﬃce or his holy rule,
nor mine – that cord which makes its wearer thin.
94 As once, on Mount Soracte, Constantine
required that Pope Silvester cure his leprosy,
so he, mi-lording it, commanded me
97 to cure him of his fevered arrogance.
He asked advice, and I maintained my silence.
He seemed plain drunk in what he had to say.

100 But still he urged: “Don’t let your heart be doubtful.
I grant you henceforth total absolution.
Teach me how Penestrina may be razed.
103 The power is mine (you know it well) to unlock
Heaven’s door. Or lock it fast. Hence these two keys.
My predecessor held them far from dear.”
106 Such points – all weighty – drove me to the view
that silence now was worse than quick assent.
“Father,” I answered, “since you wash away
109 the sin that I must now be guilty of,
some promise – generous though of mean extent –
assures you triumph from your lofty throne.”
112* Now dead, Saint Francis came for me. But then
a black alumnus of the Cherubim
cried out: “Don’t cheat! You can’t dispose of him.
115 Down must he come, to join my squalid thralls.
His sound advice was, after all, deceitful.
And since that hour, I’ve hovered round his hair.
118 Repentance fails? There can’t be absolution,
nor penitence when willing ill goes on.
That is, by contradiction, impossibile.”
121 The pain I felt! I shook myself awake.
To me he said (he took a grip): “Perhaps
you never knew: I practise logic, too.”
124 To Minos he transported me, who then –
eight times! – coiled tail around relentless spine.
In utter ire, he bit this thing, and then
127 declared: “Condemned is he to thievish ﬁre.”
So that is why, as you see here, I’m lost,
and thus go dressed in inward bitterness.’
130 And once it reached the end of these few words,
grieving, the ﬂame went oﬀ along its way,
thrashing its horn and wrenching it awry.
133 We now – my lord and I – went further on,
rounding the ridge to ﬁnd another arch
to span Ditch Nine – wherein, a fee is paid,

136 incurred by those who force fair deals apart.

CANTO 28

1* Who could relate – even in words set loose
from rhyme, even by telling it over and over –
all that I witnessed now, the blood, the wounds.
4 There is no doubt: all human speech would fail.
Our powers, whether of mind or tongue, cannot
embrace that measure of understanding.
7 Suppose that, gathered in one single whole,
were all those people of the fated South
whose blood was shed in pain on the Apulian ﬁelds – 10
be it as victims of the sons of Troy,
or else, as Livy writes unerringly,
in that long war where rings were heaped as spoils.
13 Then add all those who suﬀered grievous wounds
in wars against the Norman king, Guiscardo,
and also add that band whose bones are gleaned
16 at Ceperano still (where southerners, each one,
proved traitorous). To Tagliacozzo, then, move on.
There, ageing Elard won – by guile, not arms.
19 Were every lopped-oﬀ limb or part pierced through
seen once again, that, even so, would far
from equal all the foul display in Pocket Nine.
22 One I saw riven from his chin to fart hole.
No barrel – midslat or moon rib missing –
ever, I am certain, gaped as wide as that.
25 Between his legs his guts all dangled down,
innards and heart on show, and that grim bag
that turns to shit whatever gullets swallow.

28 My eyes were ﬁxed and gazed on him alone.
And he gazed back. Then, opening up his thorax,
hands at work: ‘Look now,’ he said, ‘how wide I spread!
31* You see how mangled is the great Mohammed.
Ali, ahead, wends weeping on his way,
cloven in countenance from quiﬀ to chin.
34 So, too, the others that you here observe,
all in their lives sowed schism, scandal, discord.
And that is why they all are here so splintered.
37 Back there a devil deftly decks us out
in these cruel ornaments, and crops each page
in every quire that comes upon his sword edge.
40 For, as we pass around this road of pain,
each wound and gash is made entire and whole
before we come to face him once again.
43 But who are you, who there sniﬀ down at us
and so perhaps are slow to meet the harm
that you’ve been sentenced to for your own crime?’
46 ‘Death has not reached him yet,’ my teacher said,
‘nor is he drawn by guilt to any pain.
I, being dead, to give him full experience,
49 am bound to lead him all through Hell, from gyre
to gyre from ring to ring through every round.
And this, I tell you, is the simple truth.’
52 To hear this said, a hundred (or yet more)
stopped short. They looked in wonder from the ditch at
me, in awe, forgetting their own agony.
55* ‘Since you, perhaps, will shortly hail the sun,
then say: If Fra Dolcino is not keen
to join me soon, he’d better stockpile well,
58 lest winter snow in drifts makes barriers
bestowing triumph on the Novarese,
which they’d not lightly come by otherwise.’
61 That was Mohammed who – as now to leave –
had raised his foot while uttering these words.
He placed it ﬂat to ground and went his way.

64 Another then – his throat pierced through, his nose
shorn oﬀ and level with his hanging brows,
one ear alone, and only that to hear –
67 now paused with all the rest to stare at me,
but opened up, before the others might,
his windpipe, crimson in its outward parts.
70 ‘You there,’ he said, ‘whom guilt does not condemn,
I’ve met you once on our Italian soil,
unless I’m much beguiled by close resemblance.
73* If you should see once more the lovely plain
that slopes between Vercelli and Marcabo,
then call to mind again Da Medicina.
76* And let the two best men of Fano know
(Guido and Angiolello, his peer),
supposing that our foresight is not vain,
79 they’ll both be slung, their necks bedecked with stones,
from boats that coast around Cattolica,
betrayed in this by a villainous baron.
82 From Cyprus on to the Majorcan isles,
Neptune has never seen a crime so great
pulled oﬀ by pirates or Argolian Greeks.
85 That traitor with his single seeing eye
(who rules a city that another with me here
might wish his sight had still to hunger for)
88 will work it so that they will come to parley,
then work it so they’ll need no prayer or vow
to save them from the gales around Focara.’
91 And I in answer: ‘Show me. Make it clear –
if you so wish I’ll take back news of you –
who is that despot with the bitter view?’
94* At which, he put his hand around the jaw
of one beside him, prising wide his mouth,
and yelled out: ‘Here he is. And he can’t utter.
97 Exiled, he drowned all Caesar’s hesitations.
For, “Anyone,” he said, “who’s well prepared
will always suﬀer harm from titubation.” ‘

100 How dismal and confused he seemed to be,
his tongue hacked out and hollow in his gullet,
so headstrong once, this Curio, in parley.
103 Then one came round with both his hands cut oﬀ.
He raised his ﬂesh stumps through the blackened air; he
made his face drip ﬁlthy red with blood,
106* and yelled: ‘Me too! I’m Mosca, you’ll recall,
who said, alas: “What’s done, well, that is done.”
And this sowed evil seed for every Tuscan.’
109 To which I added: ‘Death to all your clan!’
So, piling always grief on top of grief,
he went his way, a melancholic madman.
112 But I stayed there and, staring at the throng,
I now saw something which, without more proof,
I fear that I could never hope to speak of.
115 Conscience, though, lends me conﬁdence to try.
That good companion renders all men free
under its breastplate, knowing we are pure.
118 I saw – I’m sure – and still I seem to now,
in company with others in that herd,
a torso striding by without a head,
121 who held that head, though severed, by the hair.
It swung as might a lantern from his hand.
‘Alas!’ it said, and stared at us in wonder.
124 Himself he made a lamp for his own light.
So here were two in one and one in two.
How that can be He knows who orders so.
127 He stood directly by the bridge foot now.
He raised an arm (so, therefore, head and all)
to throw his words the closer to us there.
130 And these words came: ‘See this, the harm, the hurt.
Breathing you go still, watching on the dead.
See now: is any punishment as great?
133* And so you may return with news of me,
then know that I’m that Bertran de Born
who gave false comfort to the youthful king.

136* Father and son, I set at mortal odds.
No worse, with Absalom, Ahithophel,
whose evil promptings prodded David on.
139 Since persons so close-linked I put apart,
so I, alas, apart now bear my brain,
thus severed from its root in this great trunk.
142 In me, then, counter-suﬀering can be seen.’

CANTO 29

1 This multitude, their wounds so various,
had made my eyes (the lights I look by) drunk.
So now they wished to stand there, and just gaze.
4 But Virgil said: ‘Are you still staring on?
Why is your seeing plunged so deep among
such miserable, mutilated shades?
7 You’ve not done this in any other pocket.
Do you imagine you can count them all?
Well, think! This trench goes twenty miles around.
10* The moon already is below our feet.
The time that we’re allowed to stay is short.
And much is yet to see that still you’ve not.’
13 ‘If you had only cared,’ I answered him,
‘to know the reasons for that lingering look,
you would perhaps have let me stay still longer.’
16 But he (my leader), and myself behind,
was pressing on. I answered thus,
and added, as I went: ‘Within that den
19* where I just now, with reason, ﬁxed my eye,
there is a spirit of my blood who weeps,
grieving the guilt that, down there, sets its price.’
22 My teacher then: ‘Allow no wave of thought
henceforth to break around his memory.
Attend to other things. And let him be.
25 I saw him standing by the bridge foot there,
still gesturing – a threatening ﬁnger raised –
and heard his name called out: Geri del Bello.

28 You were so caught, intent upon the sight
of that one there, once sire of Altafort,
you did not care to look around. So oﬀ he went.’
31 ‘His violent death,’ I now addressed my lord,
‘which goes yet unavenged by any kin,
whose fate must be to share this lasting shame,
34 inspires disdain in him. I judge that this
is why he left, speaking no word to me.
This all the more makes clear to me my duty.’
37 Our talk went on in such-like terms until
we found the jutting spur that showed (or would, had
there been light to see) the ﬂoor beyond.
40 I stood there high above the ﬁnal cloister
of Rottenpockets. All its postulants
were present and revealed for us to see.
43 A host of lamentations shot around me,
their iron barbs sharp-tipped with pain and pity.
I covered up my ears with both my hands.
46* Such sicknesses as here there’d be if all
contagions born of summer heat – from wards
throughout Sardinia, the Chiana Vale, Maremma –
49 were brought together in one single hole.
That’s what it was, the stench that came from it, a fetor
rising as from rotting limbs.
52 Veering still leftwards as we always did,
we searched that ridge and reached its ﬁnal crag.
And there more vividly I came to view
55 the depths in which, unerringly, the power
of justice – minister of One on High –
will castigate those known on earth as frauds.
58* No greater woe, as I imagine it,
was ever, even in Aegina, known – where plague
infected every citizen and air
61 so dripped malignancy, its creatures all –
down to the smallest worm – fell, sickening fast.
This ancient race was then restored (so say

64 those poets who believe it true) by seed
of ants. Such woe appeared across the dark pit ﬂoor.
See, in their diﬀerent stooks, the spirits languishing.
67 Some sprawled across the stomach of the next,
some over shoulders. Others, on all fours,
dragged on (to make a change) along the road.
70 Without a word, we went on, step by step,
still gazing at and listening to the sick.
They could not lift their bodies from the ground.
73 I saw there leaning, one against the next –
propped up as pairs of saucepans are to lose
their heat – two, scabby-spotted head to toe.
76 And never have I seen a currycomb
whisked (by a groom whose boss is waiting by,
or else disgruntled to be woken up)
79 so brisk as these attacked that raging itch –
for which no salve can ever now be found –
with biting ﬁngernails to scrape at each.
82 With ﬁngernails, each tore oﬀ showers of scabs,
as might a ﬁsh knife when it’s skinning bream,
or else, perhaps, some type with larger scales.
85 ‘You there, whose ﬁngers tear your chainmail oﬀ’ –
to one of them my leader spoke these words –
‘employing them as pincers sometimes, too,
88 now tell us (may your manicure endure,
your nails work well to all eternity!),
are there Italians sunk with you down there?’
91 ‘We, wrecked and ruined, are Italians both.’
So, weeping, one of them made this reply.
‘But who are you that put to us this question?’
94 ‘I’m one,’ my leader answered, ‘who descends
with this still-living man from ledge to ledge.
My purpose is to show him all of Hell.’
97 At this, the coupling that had held them sheared,
and, trembling, each one turned himself to me,
as others did who heard these words in echoes.

100 My good, kind teacher came up close to me,
saying: ‘Just tell him what it is you want.’
And so, as he now wanted, I began:
103 ‘So may the thought of you be never robbed
from human memories in the ﬁrst of lives,
but live on brightly under many suns,
106 tell me who you might be, and of what kin.
Dread not – for all your foul and loathsome pain – but
openly make known yourselves to me.’
109* ‘I was,’ one answered, ‘an Aretine once.
Albero of Siena had me burned alive.
But I’m not brought for what I died for here.
112 O yes! It’s true, in jest I said to him:
“I’ve got the knowhow. I can ﬂy through air.”
Then he – all eyes, excited, but no genius –
115 was eager that I put my art on show.
I did not do a Daedalus. For that alone,
he got the one who called him son to burn me.
118 But Minos – not allowed to judge amiss –
condemned me to this ﬁnal slot because,
in life, I practised as an alchemist.’
121 ‘On land or sea,’ I turned towards the poet,
‘was anyone as gormless as these Sienese?
Even the French aren’t that idiotic.’
124* At which, the other leper, overhearing,
quipped in return: ‘Except, of course, for Stricca, who
really knew what temperate spending is!
127 And Nick as well, the twit. He, in that garden
where the clove seed grows, discovered ﬁrst
how rich the virtues of carnation are.
130 Omit, as well, those merry men with whom
Kid d’Ascian consumed both farms and vines.
Dazzledeye, too – who taught the boy such wisdom.
133 To see, however, who (like you) speaks here
so anti-Sienese, just sharpen up your eye.
My face – look hard – may give you your reply.

136 I am, you’ll see, the shadow of Capocchio.
Alchemically, I falsiﬁed base metals
and, if I eye you well, then you’ll recall
139 how marvellous an ape of nature I was.’

CANTO 30

1* Think of that age when Juno – wracked with wrath,
so envious of Semele – expressed her spite,
over and over, against the blood of Thebes.
4 That was the time when Athamas ran mad.
He saw his wife who carried, as she went,
in either arm the load of their two sons,
7 and yelled: ‘Come on! Let’s spread those nets! I mean
to stalk them all, both whelps and lioness.’
He then stretched out his unrelenting claws.
10 He grasped one child (Learchus was his name).
He whirled him round. He dashed him on a stone.
His wife drowned, loaded with their second son.
13 When, likewise, ever-turning Fate brought down,
in ﬂames, the Trojans from all-daring height –
and so, together, king and kingdom broke –
16 Hecuba, grieving, wretched, now enslaved,
ﬁrst saw Polyxena, her daughter, dead,
and then – to ﬁnd there, lain along the margin
19 of the sea, her youngest, Polydorus –
barked in her lunacy like any cur,
the pain of it so wrenched her mind askew.
22 And yet no fury known in Troy or Thebes
was ever seen, in anyone, to strike
so viciously at beast or human limb
25 as now I saw in two blank, naked shades –
who, racing round that circle, gnashed and gored
as swine do when their pigsty is unbarred.

28 One got Capocchio. At the very knot
of neck and spine, his tusks sank in. Then round
the hard pit ﬂoor he hauled him, belly scraping.
31* The Aretine (still there) spoke all atremble:
‘That banshee idiot is Gianni Schicchi.
He rages on, and treats us all like that.’
34 ‘Really?’ I answered. ‘Well, let’s hope his fangs
don’t pierce your rear. But (not to trouble you),
please say who’s that, before it springs away.’
37 ‘That soul is known in legend,’ he declared.
‘It’s Myrrha the Depraved, beyond the bounds
of love (as love should be) her father’s friend.
40 She made her way to meet him in that sin,
shaping herself in counterfeit disguise.
So, too, the other, shooting oﬀ. To win
43 a mare (the queen of all the herd) he shaped
in counterfeit the guise of dying Buoso,
whose testament, attested thus, was sound.’
46 And now, when these two raging shades, on whom
till now I’d ﬁxed my eye, had gone their way,
I turned and looked at other ill-created souls.
49 And one I saw was fashioned like a lute,
or would have been if severed at the groin,
to amputate those parts where humans fork.
52 Dropsy (osmosis of a morbid ﬂux):
that discomposes, as the swellings rise,
all natural ﬁt – so face and paunch mismatch –
55 constrained him, so his mouth hung open wide.
So, too, in fever victims, wracked with thirst,
one lip curls back, the lower meets the chin.
58 ‘O you who pass and know no pain (though why
I cannot understand) through this mean world,’
so he began, ‘behold and hold in mind
61 the miseries of mastercraftsman Adam.
I had, alive, my share of all I sought;
and now I crave, alas, the merest water drop.

64 Those brooks that trickle down the high green hills
to reach the Arno from the Casentine
and, as they run, make channels, chill and moist,
67 stand always in my sight. And not in vain:
the image of them parches me far more
than this disease that strips my face of meat.
70 Unbending justice probes me to the core.
It takes its hint from regions where I sinned,
meaning the more to put my sighs to ﬂight.
73* Here Fort Romena stands, and here I forged
fake specie, printed with the Baptist marque.
On that account, I left, up there, my body burned.
76 Yet could I only glimpse those woeful souls –
Guido or Sandro or their brother – here,
I’d not exchange the Branda Spring for that.
79 Already in, there’s one of them, if those
crazed shadows as they whirl around speak truth.
What use is that to me? My limbs are bound.
82 If only I were still so light and lithe
to travel in a hundred years one inch,
already I’d have started on that path,
85 seeking him out from all this ﬁlthy clan.
And this ditch turns eleven miles around.
Nor is it less than half a mile across!
88 I’m only in this mess because of them.
They led me on. I counterfeited ﬂorins
so each contained three carats-worth of dross.’
91 ‘And who,’ I said, ‘are those two so-and-sos,
steaming as wet hands do on winter days,
those lying tight against your left frontier?’
94 ‘I found them here,’ he said, ‘(they’ve not turned since)
as soon as I showered down upon this midden.
I do not think they’ll budge in all eternity.
97* Joseph was falsely charged by that “she” there.
The other, just as false, is Sinon (Trojan-Greek!).
Their biting fever brews that curdled reek.’

100 Then one of them, who took it much amiss –
or so I’d guess, to hear his name so sullied –
now thumped that tight-stretched belly with his ﬁst.
103 It rumbled forth as though it were a drum.
Adam (the master) countered with his arm
to strike him no less hard across the face,
106 and said: ‘It may well be I cannot move,
seeing how heavy I’ve become in limb.
But still my arms are free to do the job.’
109 The answer came: ‘You weren’t as free as that
when, arms trussed up, you went to mount the pyre.
Your arms were free, though, in their forging days.’
112 ‘There,’ the hydroptic said, ‘you speak mere truth.
Yet, as a witness, you were not so true
at Troy, when true words were required of you.’
115 ‘Well, I spoke false, and you struck dodgy coin.
But I’m here,’ Sinon said, ‘for one plain fault.
You were accused of more than any demon.’
118 ‘The horse! Remember that, you lying cheat!’
(This came in answer out of Swollenguts.)
‘Tough luck on you that all the world knows that.’
121 ‘And tough on you,’ the Greek replied, ‘the thirst
that cracks your bloated tongue, the bilge that swells that
belly to a hedgerow round your eyes.’
124 At which: ‘Yeah, yeah’ (the coiner). ‘Sickness
has stretched your mouth (what’s new?) to tearing point.
I may be dry. I’m swollen, ripe with pus.
127* But you’re burnt-out. Your sick head throbs and aches.
It wouldn’t take too much – a word or so –
to make you lick the mirror of Narcissus.’
130 All ears, I strained to listen in – until
I heard my teacher speak: ‘Go on! Just gaze!
It won’t take much for me to ﬁght with you.’
133 And when I heard his words, so near to wrath,
I turned towards him with a shame that still,
on calling it to mind, brews vertigo.

136 Like someone dreaming of a harm to come,
who, dreaming, yearns for this to be some dream,
and hence desires what is as though it weren’t,
139 so was I now. For wishing I could speak,
and so excuse myself, I so excused myself,
and did not think that all along I did.
142 ‘Less shame,’ my master said to me, ‘makes clean
far greater fault than yours has been. And so
cast oﬀ the weight of all your misery.
145 Consider well. I’m always by your side.
Remember this, if Fortune leads you on
to where such spats as this are played out loud.
148 To wish to hear such stuﬀ is pretty low.’

CANTO 31

1 The self-same tongue that bit me ﬁrst so hard
that both my cheeks had coloured up, bright red,
now oﬀered once again its remedy.
4* So, too (as I have heard the story told),
the spear that both Achilles and his father bore
would cause a wound that spear alone could cure.
7 We turned our back upon the dismal deep,
riding the bank that circles it around,
and made our way across without more speech.
10 Here it was less than night and less than day,
so that our seeing went no way ahead.
But then I heard a horn ring out so loud
13 that thunder in comparison is vapid,
and, turning back to see the echoing source,
I ﬁxed my eyes upon one single place.
16* After the great and grievous rout at which
was lost the sacred band of Charlemagne,
great Roland sounded notes of no such terror.
19 I had not held my head turned there for long
when (so it seemed) I now saw many towers.
And therefore, ‘Sir,’ I said, ‘what town is this?’
22 ‘Because,’ he said, ‘through all these wreaths of shade
you rush ahead too far from what’s at hand,
you form of it a blurred and empty image.
25 You’ll see quite clearly when you soon arrive
how greatly distance may deceive the sense.
So drive yourself a little further on.’

28 Then, with great tenderness, he took my hand.
He then went on: ‘And yet before we step
ahead – so all these facts may seem less odd –
31 you ought to know that these aren’t towers. They’re
giants.
These stand within the well around its rim,
navel height downwards, all the lot of them.’
34 As when a mist is thinning out, the gaze
will, point by point, begin to recompose
the ﬁgure hidden by the steam-thick air,
37 so, boring through that dense, dark atmosphere,
approaching ever closer to the edge,
false knowledge ﬂed and fear grew yet more great.
40* For, as above its circling curtain wall,
Montereggione boasts a crown of towers,
so too above the bank that rings the well
43 stood, towering here to half their body height,
the dreadful giants, who are under threat
from highest Jove whenever he wields thunder.
46 By now I saw, in each of these, the face,
the chest and shoulders, areas of paunch,
and, down the ribcage, all their dangling arms.
49 Nature did well, desisting from the art
of forming animals like that. She thus
deprived great Mars of his executors.
52 If she, on that account, did not repent
of whales and elephants, to subtle minds
this will seem right, and most intelligent.
55 For when the powers of working intellect
are wed to strength and absolute illwill,
then humans cannot ﬁnd a place to hide.
58* In bulk and length, his face could be compared
to that bronze pine cone in Saint Peter’s, Rome.
His other bones were all in due proportion.
61* And so that bank (his ﬁg leaf, ‘zone’ or apron,
hanging around his loins below) displayed,

above, up to his mane, as much of him
64 as three tall Frisians would boast in vain.
I saw their thirty-eight-inch ﬁnger spans
down from the point where cloaks are buckled on.
67 ‘Raphèl maìamècche zabì almì,’
so screaming it began, that fearsome mouth,
unﬁt to utter any sweeter psalm.
70 My leader aimed: ‘You idiotic soul!
Stick to your horn. With that, give vent to wrath,
or any passion that you chance to feel.
73 Just fumble round your neck, you great dumb thing.
You’ll ﬁnd the cord it’s tied to. There it rests.
A chevron – see? – across your mighty breast.’
76 And then to me: ‘He stands his own accuser.
It’s Nimrod there. Through his sick whim
no single tongue is spoken anywhere.
79 So, let him be. We’ll not speak in that vein.
For every tongue, to him, remains the same
as his tongue is to others: quite unknown.’
82 Now, turning left, we made a longer march;
and there (the distance of a crossbow shot)
we found a bigger ogre, ﬁercer still.
85 Who that lord was I cannot tell, who locked
these shackles round him and about. He held
his right arm bound in front, his left behind,
88 by one tight chain that – tangling down – was hitched
a full ﬁve turns around the bits we saw,
netherwards stretching from his neck to waist.
91 ‘This one, in pride, was quick to prove his power
against the majesty of Jupiter.’
Thus spoke my leader. ‘His reward is this.
94* By name Ephialtes, his deeds were done
when giants caused the deities such dread.
He can’t now budge the arm he wielded then.’
97 And I to him: ‘If it were possible
to gain with my own eyes experience

of measureless Briareus, that I’d like.’
100 ‘Antaeus,’ he in answer said, ‘you’ll see
not very far from here. And he – unchained
and speaking, too – will lower us to sin’s last ﬂoor.
103 The one whom you so keenly wish to see
is over there, a good way further on,
constrained like these but ﬁercer still in mien.’
106 No earthquake, rude in vigour, ever struck
a tower with such great force as Ephialtes,
writhing round suddenly, now shook himself.
109 And, more than ever now in mortal fear,
sheer terror would have done the trick, had I
not seen the fetters that restrained him there.
112 And now, as we proceeded on our way,
we came upon Antaeus, rising high
(omitting head) ﬁve yards above the pit.
115 ‘You there! Yes, you! In that propitious vale
where Hannibal turned tail with all his men –
and so made Scipio the heir of fame –
118 you brought as spoils a thousand lions back.
And if, like all your brothers, you had joined
in battle with the gods above, then (some
121 believe) those earthborn sons might well have won.
Then set us down – and please, no dark disdain –
deep in Cocytus, locked by freezing keys.
124 Don’t make us trudge to Tityos or Typhon.
This man can give you what you yearn to have.
Therefore bend down. And do not twist your snout.
127 To earth he can still carry back your name.
He’s living still – and so expects to, long,
unless grace summons him before his time.’
130 My teacher spoke. The giant in great haste
stretched out his hands – whose powerful clutch had once
been felt by Hercules – to take him in his ﬁst.
133 And Virgil, when he felt himself well held,
now said to me: ‘Come here so I can take you!’

He packed us in – one bundle, him and me.
136* Just as the Garisenda tower, when viewed
beneath its leaning side, appears to fall
if any ﬂoating cloud should pass behind,
139 so, too, Antaeus seemed to me, as there
I stood expecting him to bend. And now
I’d willingly have gone some other way.
142 Yet lightly he set us, lightly, in those depths
that eat at Lucifer and Judas, too.
He did not, bowing so, make long delay,
145 but swayed again up straight as ship masts do.

CANTO 32

1* If I had rhymes that rawly rasped and cackled
(and chimed in keeping with that cacky hole
at which, point down, all other rock rings peak), 4 I might
then squeeze the juices of my thought
more fully out of me. But since I don’t,
not without dread, I bring myself to speak.
7 It’s not (no kidding) any sort of joke
to form in words the universal bum,
no task for tongues still whimpering ‘Mum!’ and ‘Dad!’
10* The Muses, though, may raise my verse – women
who once helped Amphion lock Thebes in walls –
so fact and word may not too far diverge.
13* You ill-begotten zombies, worst of all,
who stand there where to utter is so hard,
better had you been born as sheep or bezoars!
16 Now deep within the darkness of that well
and further even than those giant feet,
I stood and gazed sheer upwards at that wall
19 when, out of nowhere, I heard: ‘Watch your step!
Don’t plant those feet of yours on some poor head; we’re
here all brothers in this sorry crowd.’
22 I turned at this, and now could see – around,
and all beneath, my feet – a lake of ice
that seemed far less like water than clear glass.
25 The Danube, even in winter Österreich,
never congealed its currents to so thick
a veil (the Don, neither, under freezing skies)

28* as this. And if the crags of Tambernic
had crashed down here – or Pike Pietrapana –
its very fringe would not have cracked or creaked.
31 As frogs sit croaking in the harvest month
(when country girls will dream of gleaning corn), their
snouts just poking from the water line,
34 so too these shadows, ﬁxed in ice lead-blue,
to where, in shame, we start to blush, their teeth as
rhythmic, beakily, as chattering storks.
37 And each one kept his face bent down. From mouths
the cold, from hearts their miseries force
a public testament to suﬀering.
40* I stood a while just gazing all around,
then, glancing to my feet, I saw here two
embraced so closely that their head hair mixed.
43 ‘Go on,’ I said, ‘so tell me who you are,
straining so tightly, tit to tit.’ Coupled,
the two eased back their necks. Their faces now
46 were straight to mine. Once moist within, their eyes
welled up. The teardrops ﬂowed toward their lips.
But chill gripped these, to lock them in their holes.
49 To wood wood never has been clamped so hard
as these two were; and, overwhelmed with ire,
each butted each like any pair of goats.
52 Another in the frost had lost both ears.
Still gazing downwards, he was ﬁrst to speak:
‘Why eye us so, as though we were your mirror?
55 If you’re so keen to know who these two are,
that valley where Bisenzio streams down
belonged to them, as to their father, earlier.
58* They issued from a single womb. And you
may go, if you so please, through all of Cain
ﬁnding no shadow freeze in aspic ﬁtter,
61* not Mordred, even – breast and shadow pierced
by thrusts his “uncle”, great King Arthur, gave – neither
Focaccia (source of strife), nor this one here, 64 whose

head, annoyingly, so cramps my view.
His name was Sassolo Mascheroni,
and you, if you are Tuscan, know him well.
67 However, not to drag out speeches further,
be told that I’m Camiscion de’ Pazzi.
I wait for Carlin. He’ll acquit me here.’
70* And then I saw a thousand mongrel faces
bitten by frost. (I shiver, remembering –
and always will – to see a frozen puddle.)
73 Trembling, as ever, in the endless nip,
onwards we went to reach the cone’s last core,
where all the weight of everything weighs down.
76 And whether by intention, chance or fate
(well, I don’t know!) pacing among these heads,
hard in the face of one, I struck my foot.
79 It screeched out, whingingly: ‘Why stamp on me?
Unless, of course, you’re here to take revenge
for Montaperti. If not, why do me harm?’
82 I to my teacher: ‘Wait a little here.
I’ll go and free myself of doubts with him.
Then push me on as much as you desire.’
85 My leader paused. And, turning to the one
still spitting curses out, I now inquired:
‘So who are you, to go on scolding others?’
88 ‘And who are you? You trek through Antenora,
bashing,’ he said, ‘at other people’s cheeks.
Were you alive, I wouldn’t stand for it.’
91 ‘I am alive,’ I answered him. ‘How dear to you
I might become, if fame is what you thirst for!
I could well note your name among the rest.’
94 ‘I yearn,’ he answered, ‘for the opposite.
Just go away and give me no more grief.
You don’t know how to ﬂatter in a bog like this.’
97 And so I grasped him tight against the scalp.
‘You’ll name yourself,’ I said to him. ‘If not,
you’ll ﬁnd no single bristle on your topknot.’

100 ‘Don’t think,’ he said, ‘because you pluck my curls,
I mean to say or show you bugger all,
bomb as you may my skull ten thousand times.’
103 I’d got him twisted in my ﬁngers now,
and had, already, yanked out several tufts.
He barked, but kept his eyes held ﬁrmly down.
106 Another yelling now: ‘What’s with you, Big Mouth?
Not satisﬁed to castanet cold jaws?
You bark as well. What devil’s got to you?’
109 And then I said: ‘I’d have you speak no more.
You’re vile, you traitor. I’ll augment your shame, I’ll carry
in your name a true report.’
112 ‘Go on,’ he answered, ‘gossip all you like.
But don’t, if you get out of here, be silent
concerning him, his tongue so slick.
115 He weeps for having ﬁngered French-y silver.
Now you can say: “I saw that man from Duera.
He dwells where all the sinners keep quite cool.”
118 And should you ask me: “Are there others here?”
Beside you, there is Abbot Beccheria,
the one whose gizzard Florence sawed right through.
121 Then Ghibelline Jack, I guess, is further on,
with Ganelon and Tebaldello, too.
He slid the doors of sleeping Faience back.’
124* By now we had already gone our way.
But then I saw two frozen in one single hole,
one head a headpiece to the one below.
127 As bread is mangled by some famished mouth,
so too the higher gnawed the lower head,
precisely where the nape and brainstem meet.
130 The dying Tydeus in this same way,
in loathing, chewed the brows of dead Menalippus,
gnawing the skull and everything besides.
133 ‘O you who by so bestial a show
make known your hatred for the one you eat,
now tell me – why? I give my word,’ I said,

136 ‘if you complain of him with proper cause,
then once I know his name and how he sinned,
I’ll make you in the world a fair return,
139 provided means of speech do not fall dry.’

CANTO 33

1 Jaws lifted now from that horrible dish,
the sinner – wiping each lip clean on hair that fringed the
mess he’d left the head in, at its rear – 4 began: ‘You ask
that I should tell anew
the pain that hopelessly, in thought alone,
before I voice it, presses at my heart.
7 Yet if I may, by speaking, sow the fruit
of hate to slur this traitor, caught between my teeth, then
words and tears, you’ll see, will ﬂow as one.
10 Who you might be, I do not know, nor how
you’ve come to be down here. But when you speak,
you seem (there’s little doubt) a Florentine.
13* You need to see: I was Count Ugolino.
This is Ruggieri, the archbishop, there.
I’ll tell you now why we two are so close.
16 That I, in consequence of his vile thoughts,
was captured – though I trusted in this man –
and after died, I do not need to say.
19 But this cannot have carried to your ears:
that is, how savagely I met my death.
You’ll hear it now, and know if he has injured me.
22* One scant slit in the walls of Eaglehouse
(because of me, they call it now the Hunger Tower.
Be sure, though: others will be locked up there)
25 had shown me, in the shaft that pierces it,
many new moons by now, when this bad dream
tore wide the veil of what my future was.

28* This thing here then appeared to me as Master
of the Hounds, who tracked the wolf – his cubs as well –
out on the hill where Lucca hides from Pisa.
31 In front, as leaders of the pack, he placed
the clans Gualandi, Sismond and Lanfranchi,
their bitches hunting eager, lean and smart.
34 The chase was brief. Father and sons, it seemed,
were wearying; and soon – or so it seemed –
I saw those sharp fangs raking down their ﬂanks.
37 I woke before the day ahead had come,
and heard my sons (my little ones were there)
cry in their sleep and call out for some food.
40 How hard you are if, thinking what my heart
foretold, you do not feel the pain of it.
Whatever will you weep for, if not that?
43 By now they all had woken up. The time
was due when, as routine, our food was brought.
Yet each was doubtful, thinking of their dream.
46 Listening, I heard the door below locked shut,
then nailed in place against that dreadful tower.
I looked in their dear faces, spoke no word.
49 I did not weep. Inward, I turned to stone.
They wept. And then my boy Anselmo spoke:
“What are you staring at? Father, what’s wrong?”
52 And so I held my tears in check and gave
no answer all that day, nor all the night
that followed on, until another sun came up.
55 A little light had forced a ray into
our prison, so full of pain. I now could see
on all four faces my own expression.
58 Out of sheer grief, I gnawed on both my hands.
And they – who thought I did so from an urge
to eat – all, on the instant, rose and said:
61 “Father, for us the pain would be far less
if you would chose to eat us. You, having dressed us in this
wretched ﬂesh, ought now to strip it oﬀ.”

64 So I kept still, to not increase their miseries.
And that day and the day beyond, we all were mute.
Hard, cruel earth, why did you not gape wide?
67 As then we reached the fourth of all those days,
Gaddo pitched forward, stretching at my feet.
“Help me,” he said. “Why don’t you help me, Dad!”
70 And there he died. You see me here. So I saw them,
the three remaining, falling one by one
between the next days – ﬁve and six – then let
73 myself, now blind, feel over them, calling
on each, now all were dead, for two days more.
Then hunger proved a greater power than grief.’
76 His words were done. Now, eyes askew, he grabbed
once more that miserable skull – his teeth,
like any dog’s teeth, strong against the bone.
79* Pisa, you scandal of the lovely land
where ‘yes’ is uttered in the form of sì ,
your neighbours may be slow to punish you,
82 but let those reefs, Capraia and Gorgogna,
drift, as a barrage, to the Arno’s mouth,
so that your people – every one – are drowned.
85 So what if – as the rumour goes – the great Count
Ugolino did cheat fortresses from you.
You had no right to crucify his children.
88 Pisa, you are a newborn Thebes! Those boys
were young. That made them innocent. I’ve named
just two. I now name Uguiccione and Brigata.
91 We now moved on, and came to where the ice
so roughly swaddled yet another brood.
And these – not hunched – bend back for all to view.
94 They weep. Yet weeping does not let them weep.
Their anguish meets a blockage at the eye.
Turned in, this only makes their heartache more.
97 Their tears ﬁrst cluster into frozen buds,
and then – as though a crystal visor – ﬁll
the socket of the eye beneath each brow.

100 My own face now – a callus in the chill –
had ceased to be a throne to any kind
of sentiment. And yet, in spite of all,
103 it seemed I felt a wind still stirring here.
‘Who moves these currents, sir?’ I now inquired.
‘At depths like these, aren’t vapours wholly spent?’
106 He in reply: ‘Come on, come on! You soon
will stand where your own probing eye shall see
what brings this drizzling exhalation on.’
109 A case of icy-eye-scab now yelled out:
‘You must be souls of such malignancy
you merit placement in the lowest hole.
112 Prise oﬀ this rigid veil, to clear my eyes.
Let me awhile express the grief that swells
in my heart’s womb before my tears next freeze.’
115 I answered: ‘Are you asking help from me?
Tell me who you are. Then I’ll free your gaze,
or travel – promise! – to the deepest ice.’
118* ‘I,’ he replied, ‘am Brother Alberigo,
I of the Evil Orchard, Fruiterer.
Here I receive exquisite dates for ﬁgs.’
121 ‘Oh,’ I now said, ‘so you’re already dead?’
‘Well, how my body fares above,’ he said,
‘still in the world, my knowledge is not sure.
124* There is, in Ptolomea, this advantage,
that souls will frequently come falling down
before Fate Atropos has granted them discharge.
127 I very willingly will tell you more,
but only scrape this tear-glaze from my face.
The instant any soul commits, like me,
130 some act of treachery, a demon takes
possession of that body-form and rules
its deeds until its time is done. Swirling,
133* the soul runs downwards to this sink. And so
the body of that shade behind – a-twitter
all this winter through – still seems up there, perhaps.

136 You’re bound to know, arriving only now,
that this is Signor Branca (“Hookhand”) d’Oria.
Years have gone by since he was ice-packed here.’
139 ‘I think,’ I said, ‘that this must be a con.
For how can Branca d’Oria be dead?
He eats and drinks and sleeps and puts his clothes on.’
142 ‘Recall that ditch,’ he said, ‘named Rotklorsville,
where, higher up, they brew adhesive pitch?
Well, long before Mike Zanche got to that,
145 Hookhand was history. He, as proxy, left
a devil in his skin (his kinsman’s here as well,
the one who planned with him the double-cross).
148 But please, now reach your hand to me down here.
Open my eyes for me.’ I did not open them.
To be a swine in this case was pure courtesy.
151 You Genovese, deviant, deranged
and stuﬀed with every sort of vicious canker!
Why have you not been wiped yet from the earth?
154 Among the worst of all the Romagnuoli
I found there one of yours, whose works were such
his soul already bathes in Cocytus.
157 His body, seemingly, lives on above.

CANTO 34

1* ‘Vexilla regis prodeunt inferni ,
marching towards us. Fix your eyes ahead,’
my teacher said, ‘and see if you can see it.’
4 As though a windmill when a thick fog breathes –
or else when dark night grips our hemisphere – seen from
a distance, turning in the wind,
7 so there a great contraption had appeared.
And I now shrank, against the wind, behind
my guide. There were no glades to shelter in.
10 I was by now (I write this verse in fear)
where all the shades in ice were covered up,
transparent as are straws preserved in glass.
13 Some lay there ﬂat, and some were vertical,
one with head raised, another soles aloft,
another like a bow, bent face to feet.
16 And then when we had got still further on,
where now my master chose to show to me
that creature who had once appeared so fair,
19 he drew away from me and made me stop,
saying: ‘Now see! Great Dis! Now see the place where you
will need to put on all your strength.’
22 How weak I now became, how faded, dry –
reader, don’t ask, I shall not write it down – for anything I
said would fall far short.
25 I neither died nor wholly stayed alive.
Just think yourselves, if your minds are in ﬂower, what I
became, bereft of life and death.

28* The emperor of all these realms of gloom
stuck from the ice at mid-point on his breast.
And I am more a giant (to compare)
31 than any giant measured to his arm.
So now you’ll see how huge the whole must be,
when viewed in ﬁt proportion to that limb.
34 If, once, he was as lovely as now vile,
when ﬁrst he raised his brow against his maker, then truly
grief must all proceed from him.
37 How great a wonder it now seemed to me
to see three faces on a single head!
The forward face was bright vermilion.
40 The other two attached themselves to that
along each shoulder on the central point,
and joined together at the crest of hair.
43 The rightward face was whitish, dirty yellow.
The left in colour had the tint of those
beyond the source from which the Nile ﬁrst swells.
46 Behind each face there issued two great vanes,
all six proportioned to a fowl like this.
I never saw such size in ocean sails.
49 Not feathered as a bird’s wings are, bat-like
and leathery, each fanned away the air,
so three unchanging winds moved out from him,
52 Cocytus being frozen hard by these.
He wept from all six eyes. And down each chin
both tears and bloody slobber slowly ran.
55 In every mouth he mangled with his teeth
(as ﬂax combs do) a single sinning soul,
but brought this agony to three at once.
58 Such biting, though, aﬀects the soul in front
as nothing to the scratching he received.
His spine at times showed starkly, bare of skin.
61 ‘That one up there, condemned to greater pain,
is Judas Iscariot,’ my teacher said,
‘his head inside, his feet out, wriggling hard.

64* The other two, their heads hung down below,
are Brutus, dangling from the jet black snout
(look how he writhes there, uttering not a word!), 67 the
other Cassius with burly look.
But night ascends once more. And now it’s time for us to
quit this hole. We’ve seen it all.’
70 As he desired, I clung around his neck.
With purpose, he selected time and place
and, when the wings had opened to the full,
73 he took a handhold on the furry sides,
and then, from tuft to tuft, he travelled down between the
shaggy pelt and frozen crust.
76 But then, arriving where the thigh bone turns
(the hips extended to their widest there),
my leader, with the utmost stress and strain,
79 swivelled his head to where his shanks had been
and clutched the pelt like someone on a climb, so now I
thought: ‘We’re heading back to Hell.’
82 ‘Take care,’ my teacher said. ‘By steps like these,’
breathless and panting, seemingly all-in,
‘we need to take our leave of so much ill.’
85 Then through a ﬁssure in that rock he passed
and set me down to perch there on its rim.
After, he stretched his careful stride towards me.
88 Raising my eyes, I thought that I should see
Lucifer where I, just now, had left him,
but saw instead his legs held upwards there.
91 If I was struggling then to understand,
let other dimwits think how they’d have failed to see what
point it was that I now passed.
94 ‘Up on your feet!’ my teacher ordered me.
‘The way is long, the road is cruelly hard.
The sun is at the morning bell already.’
97 This was no stroll, where now we had arrived,
through any palace but a natural cave.
The ground beneath was rough, the light was weak.

100 ‘Before my roots are torn from this abyss,
sir,’ I said, upright, ‘to untangle me
from error, say a little more of this.
103* Where is the ice? And why is that one there
ﬁxed upside down? How is it that the sun
progressed so rapidly from evening on to day?’
106 And he in answer: ‘You suppose you’re still
on that side of the centre where I gripped
that wormrot’s coat that pierces all the world.
109 While I was still descending, you were there.
But once I turned, you crossed, with me, the point to
which from every part all weight drags down.
112 So you stand here beneath the hemisphere
that now is covered wholly with dry land,
under the highest point at which there died
115 the one man sinless in his birth and life.
Your feet are set upon a little sphere
that forms the other aspect of Giudecca.
118 It’s morning here. It’s evening over there.
The thing that made a ladder of his hair
is still as ﬁxed as he has always been.
121 Falling from Heaven, when he reached this side,
the lands that then spread out to southern parts in fear of
him took on a veil of sea.
124 These reached our hemisphere. Whatever now
is visible to us – in ﬂight perhaps from him – took refuge
here and left an empty space.’
127 There is a place (as distant from Beelzebub
as his own tomb extends in breadth)
known not by sight but rather by the sound
130 of waters falling in a rivulet
eroding, by the winding course it takes (which is not very
steep), an opening in that rock.
133 So now we entered on that hidden path,
my lord and I, to move once more towards
a shining world. We did not care to rest.

136 We climbed, he going ﬁrst and I behind,
until through some small aperture I saw
the lovely things the skies above us bear.
139 Now we came out, and once more saw the stars.

Commedia Cantica 2:
Purgatorio

CANTO 1

1 To race now over better waves, my ship
of mind – alive again – hoists sail, and leaves
behind its little keel the gulf that proved so cruel.
4 And I’ll sing, now, about that second realm
where human spirits purge themselves from stain,
becoming worthy to ascend to Heaven.
7* Here, too, dead poetry will rise again.
For now, you sacred Muses, I am yours.
So let Calliope, a little, play her part,
10 and follow as I sing, with chords that scourged
the wretched Magpies (young girls, once) till they
despaired of pardon for their insolence.
13 Soft hues of sapphire from the orient,
collecting gently, marked the circles now
of skies serene from height to horizon.
16 And this sight – once I left the morbid air,
which weighed so heavy on my eyes and heart –
began afresh to bring my eyes delight.
19* The lovely planet, strengthening to our love,
lit up with laughter all the orient sky,
veiling her escort, Pisces, in bright light.
22 I turned now to the right. I set my mind
up on the southern pole, and saw four stars
that none – save Eve and Adam – ever saw.
25 The heavens, it seemed, rejoiced in these four gleams.
Oh widowed North (your name means seven stars),
how great your lack, to never look on those!

28* I made my gaze, at last, abandon them,
and turning back to glimpse the other pole –
from which the Wain, already, had gone down –
31* I saw nearby an old man on his own,
deserving (from the air and look he had)
of all respect a son might give his sire.
34 The beard he wore was long and ﬂecked with white,
as, too, the hair that ﬂowed down from his head, falling
upon his breast in double braids.
37 The rays that shot from those four holy stars
adorned his brow with honour so I saw
his face as clear as if the sun shone there.
40 ‘And who are you, you fugitives who ﬂee,
across the unseeing stream, eternal gaol?’
He spoke, and moved his beard in noble plumes.
43 ‘Who was your guide? What lantern led you on
beyond those deepest reaches of the night
that make the vale of Hell for ever black?
46 The laws of the abyss – do these break down?
Are counsels newly changed in Heaven’s height
so you, the damned, approach my secret hills?’
49 My leader took me ﬁrmly in his grip,
and – urging me with gestures, hands and words
to bend my brow and knee in reverence –
52 ‘I do not, of myself, come here,’ he said.
‘A lady came from Heaven. And her prayers
led me to help this man, and be his guide.
55 But since your will is that the truth be told
more fully as to what we are and why,
I cannot of my own will say you “nay”.
58 This man has yet to see his ﬁnal night,
but through his own stupidity was close,
and scarcely had the time in which to turn.
61 Then I was sent, for his sake (as I’ve said),
and found no way to see that he survived,
save that which I have set myself to take.

64 I have already shown him all the damned,
and mean that he should see those spirits now
who, in your care, themselves seek purity.
67 Too long to say how I have brought him here.
But power comes down and strengthens me in this – to
lead him on, to see and hear you speak.
70 Look kindly on his coming, if you will.
He goes in search of liberty. All know –
who gave their life for that – how dear it is.
73 You know yourself. For, dying in that cause,
death had, at Utica, no sting for you.
Your mortal robe, on Judgement Day, will shine.
76* Eternal laws are not through us made vain.
This man still lives, and Minos binds me not.
I’m from that circle where the modest eyes
79 of Marcia, your wife, are seen. Eyes turned,
she prays, O sacred breast, you keep her still your own.
For love of her, incline to our entreaties.
82 So let us pass through all your seven realms.
I’ll take your gracious words to Marcia –
if you will grant we speak of you down there.’
85 ‘Once, Marcia,’ he said, ‘so pleased my eyes,
while I was there, that I, in gratitude,
would do for her whatever she might choose.
88 But now she dwells beyond the evil stream.
And therefore, by a law in force since I
came out of it, she cannot move me more.
91 Yet if in Heaven there is, as you declare,
a lady who commands and moves your deeds,
ﬁne words aren’t needed. Ask it in her name.
94 Go, and around this man now bind a belt,
formed from a single rush grown straight and smooth,
then wash his features clean of ﬁlth and stains.
97 It cannot be that any eye, still clutched
by mist and murkiness, should meet the ﬁrst
of ministers who’ll come from Paradise.

100 Around this little island, all around
its lowest reaches where the breakers beat,
are rushes, borne up by the yielding ooze.
103 No other plant that comes to leaf or grows
to form a rigid stem could ever thrive.
For none of these could bend to take those strokes.
106 Do not return along the way you came.
The sun that rises now will show the way
to take this mountain at a gentler rate.’
109 So saying, he had gone. Without a word,
I rose. And, drawing nearer to my guide,
tight by his side, I set my eyes on him.
112 And he began: ‘Follow my steps, dear son.
Let’s turn back now. From here the level shore,
in reaching to its boundaries, slopes down.’
115 Dawn was defeating now the last hour sung
by night, which ﬂed before it. And far away
I recognized the tremblings of the sea.
118 Alone, we walked along the open plain,
as though, returning to a path we’d lost,
our steps, until we came to that, were vain.
121 Then, at a place in shadow where the dew
still fought against the sun and, cooled by breeze, had
scarcely yet been thinned out into vapour,
124 my master placed the palms of both his hands,
spread wide, lightly and gently on the tender grass.
And I, aware of what his purpose was,
127 oﬀered my tear-stained cheeks to meet his touch.
At which, he made once more entirely clean
the colour that the dark of Hell had hidden.
130* We then came out across an empty shore
that never saw its waters sailed upon
by any man who knew how to return.
133 There, at another’s will, he girded me.
And this was marvellous: that, as he chose
that simple plant, another like it rose,

136 reborn the instant that he plucked it out.

CANTO 2

1* The sun had reached, already, that horizon
the arc of whose meridian, at its height,
covers Jerusalem as daytime ends.
4 And night, which circles opposite the sun,
was rising out of Ganges with the Scales,
which leave her hand, once she has overcome.
7 So lovely Aurora’s cheeks, both red and white,
were turning, where I was, to sallow rose
as dawn grew older in the eastern sky.
10 We went on walking, still beside the sea,
as people do when pondering the road.
(Their hearts go forward, though their limbs delay.) 13 But
look! As Mars – surprised, when morning breaks,
by thickening vapours – glows to burning red,
low in the west above its ocean ﬂoor,
16 there now appeared (may I see that once more!)
a light that came so swift across the sea
that nothing else in ﬂight could equal it.
19 And, having brieﬂy drawn my eyes away
to ask my leader what this light could be,
I saw it now grown greater and more bright.
22 And then, around it, all appeared to me
a something of I-did-not-know pure white,
and, bit by bit, another under that.
25 As long as these ﬁrst whitenesses seemed wings,
my teacher spoke no word. But when he saw
and recognized who was this galley man:

28 ‘Come now,’ he cried out. ‘Bend your knees to him!
Look there! God’s angel! Fold your hands in prayer.
Henceforth, you’ll meet this kind of minister.
31 You see he scorns all human instruments.
He needs no oar, nor any other sail
than his own wings, to ply these distant shores.
34 You see he holds these upright to the skies
and, with eternal pinions, fans the air.
These do not shift as human tresses do.’
37 Then, as he came towards us more and more,
that holy bird, he seemed the brighter still.
My eyes could not, close to, sustain the sight.
40 I bent my eyes. He reached the shore – his boat
so swift, so quick, so light, so elegant,
no wave could swallow any part of it.
43 Celestial, at the stern, the pilot stood –
beatitude, it seemed, inscribed on him –
and, ranged within, a hundred spirits more.
46* ‘In exitu Israel de Aegypto’ :
they sang this all together, in one voice,
with all the psalm that’s written after this.
49 Then, over them, he made the holy cross,
at which they ﬂung themselves upon the shore.
And he, as fast as he had come, went oﬀ.
52 The crowd that now remained, it seemed, was strange,
astray there, wondering, looking all around,
as people do, assessing what is new.
55* On every side the sun shot daylight darts.
Its well-aimed arrows had already chased
the stars of Capricorn from middle sky,
58 by which time these new people raised their brows,
saying to us: ‘If you two know this place,
point us the way to go towards the Mount.’
61 And Virgil answered: ‘You may think that we
possess experience of where we are.
But we, like you, are pilgrim foreigners.

64 We came a little while before yourselves,
taking a diﬀerent, hard and bitter road.
So now the climb will seem to us a game.’
67 The souls who were aware (because I breathed)
that I was still alive, now blenched in awe,
and, wondering at the sight, grew very pale.
70 And, as around some messenger who bears
an olive branch in hand, crowds form to hear
the news – none shy to trample to the fore –
73 so these souls, too, stares ﬁxed upon my face,
forgetting almost (all so fortunate!)
to go ahead and make themselves more ﬁne.
76* And one drew forward now, I saw, to me
to take me in his arms with such great warmth
it moved me, so I did the same to him.
79 Ah shadows, empty save in how they look!
Three times I locked my hands behind his back.
As many times I came back to my breast.
82 Wonder, I think, was painted over me.
At which the shadow smiled, and so drew back,
while I, pursuing him, pressed further on.
85 Gently, he told me I had better stop.
And then I knew who this was, so I prayed
that he should speak and pause there for a while.
88 His answer came: ‘As ﬁrst in mortal ﬂesh
I loved you well, so, freed, I love you now.
And so I stop. But you, why go through here?’
91* ‘Casella!’ I said. ‘My own! I take this course
to come once more where I have now arrived.
But how have you been robbed of so much time?’
94 ‘No one has done me violence,’ he said,
‘if many times my voyage was denied
by Him Who chooses who’ll He take, and when.
97 For His will stands at one with God’s just will.
Yet truly for the last three months He’s picked, in utter
peace, whoever’s wished to board.

100* So I, who now had gone back to that shore
where Tiber waters turn themselves to salt,
was, in all kindness, taken up by him.
103 He’s set His wings back now towards that gorge,
since all who don’t descend to Acheron
will always gather at that river mouth.’
106 And I: ‘If no new law has robbed you of
your memory or skill in songs of love –
with which you once would calm all my desires –
109 then, if you’d care to, ease my soul a while.
For coming here with still its body’s shape,
it is so worn, and weary of the way.’
112* ‘Love that speaks reasons in my mind to me…’
So he began, and in a tone so sweet
the sweetness, even now, sounds in my heart.
115 My teacher, I myself and those who’d come
along with him, were so content with this
that nothing touched the mind apart from that.
118 So there we were, attentive to these notes,
entirely still, then calling suddenly,
that stern old man: ‘What’s this, malingering souls?
121 What’s this neglect, this simply-standing-here?
Go run towards the mountain. Shed that skin
which won’t let God be manifest to you.’
124 Compare: when doves, when gleaning grain or weeds,
ﬂock all together at their feeding place,
with none of their habitual pride, at peace,
127 if something they are fearful of appears,
then suddenly they’ll leave that bait behind,
assailed by greater worries as they are.
130 In that same way, I saw that fresh new band
break oﬀ their song and ﬂee towards the cliﬀ, as people
do, not knowing where they’ll end.
133 Our own departure wasn’t much less swift.

CANTO 3

1 Although the suddenness with which they ﬂed
dispersed the rest across the open plain,
turning towards the Mount, where justice probes,
4 I drew the closer to my trusted friend.
For how, without him, could I run ahead?
And who but he could draw me up that hill?
7 But he, it seemed, was gnawed by self-reproach.
Such dignity of conscience, clear and clean,
bitten so keenly by so slight a fault!
10 When once his steps had put aside that haste
that strips the air of honour from our deeds,
my mind, till now tight-reined within itself,
13 in eagerness of purpose broadened out.
I gave my sight to meet the rising ground,
higher than all, that banks towards the skies.
16 The sun that ﬂared behind us, brilliant red,
broke now in front of me – my silhouette! –
as rays of light lay resting on my form.
19 I turned around, to one side, fearing I
had been abandoned there, seeing ahead
of me alone the earth was dark with shade.
22 And he, my strength, swung straight around to say:
‘Why so dismayed and faithless? Don’t you know
that I am with you and still guide your steps?
25* The evening falls where now, within its grave
that body lies in which I cast a shade,
Napoli has it, borne from Brindisi.

28 If nothing now is shadowed at my feet,
don’t wonder any more than when the rays
the heavens project don’t block each other out.
31* To suﬀer torments both of heat and chill,
the Utmost Power gives bodies, ﬁt for that,
not wishing how it does to be revealed.
34 It’s madness if we hope that rational minds
should ever follow to its end the road
that one true being in three persons takes.
37* Content yourselves with quia , human kind.
Had you been able to see everything,
Mary need not have laboured to give birth.
40* You saw the fruitless yearning of those men
who might have had that yearning satisﬁed,
now given them eternally to mourn.
43 Plato, I mean, and Aristotle, too,
and many more with them.’ He bowed his head
and said no more, remaining darkly troubled.
46 We had, meanwhile, now reached the mountain foot.
And there we came across a cliﬀ so sheer
that legs, though willing, were quite useless there.
49* Between Fort Lerici and Turbia
the wildest, steepest scarp would be, compared
with this, an easy stairway, opening clear.
52 ‘Now who’s to know on which side this cliﬀ sinks’ –
so stopping in his tracks my teacher said –
‘to let us climb, since we have got no wings?’
55 And while he went along, his head bent low,
examining in thought the journey’s scheme,
and I, in wonder, gazed around the rock,
58 a tribe of souls appeared, towards our left,
moving in our direction (though their tread came slow and
so it hardly seemed to us they did).
61 ‘Lift up your eyes! Look, sir,’ I said to him.
‘There, over there, are some who’ll give advice,
if you yourself have nothing to suggest.’

64 He looked across, his face now free from doubt,
and answered: ‘Let’s go there. They come so slow.
And you, dear son, be conﬁdent, take heart.’
67 Those people, when we’d gone a thousand steps,
were still, I’d say, as far away from us
as someone with a sling might reach by hand,
70 when, one and all, they clung to that hard mass
of towering rock, and stood there ﬁrm and tight,
as travellers, uncertain, glance about.
73 ‘You chosen ones, who met your end so well,
I ask you,’ Virgil started, ‘by that peace
which, as I think, is waiting for you all,
76 please tell us where the mountain angles down
to make it possible for us to climb.
For those who know the most, most hate time lost.’
79 As silly sheep come edging from their fold,
one, two and three, the rest all standing there
timidly turning earthwards eyes and snouts,
82 to do exactly what the ﬁrst one does,
huddling against her if she hesitates,
quiet and meek, not knowing why they do,
85 so, too, I now saw moving out to me
the forward markers of that happy ﬂock,
modest in look and digniﬁed in walk.
88 When those towards the front saw shattered light
falling at my right hand towards the ground
(so that, from me, the shadow reached the cliﬀ),
91 they stopped and drew themselves a little back.
Likewise the rest that followed on from them.
Not knowing why, they did the very same.
94 ‘You need not ask. I freely will confess
that what you see are truly human limbs.
That’s why the sunlight on the earth is split.
97 Don’t wonder at the sight but just believe
that, not without some virtue from the skies,
does he attempt to overcome this wall.’

100 So said my teacher. And these honoured folk
replied: ‘Turn back! Go on ahead of us’,
and signalled this to us with hands reversed.
103* And one of them began: ‘Whoever you,
thus going on your way, may be, turn round
and say if you have ever seen me there.’
106 I turned to him and ﬁxed him with my gaze.
Fair-haired and handsome, with a noble look,
a sword stroke, though, had cut across his brow.
109 In all humility, I then denied
that I, till then, had seen him. ‘Look!’ he said,
and pointed out a wound high on his chest.’
112 Then, smiling: ‘I am Manfred,’ he declared,
‘grandson to Constance, holy empress.
I pray you, therefore, when you’ve once returned,
115* seek out my lovely daughter, who has borne
the honoured crowns of Sicily and Aragon.
Tell her the truth, whatever else is said:
118 I, broken in my person, had received
two mortal wounds and, weeping, gave myself
to Him who, freely, cares to pardon us.
121 My sins and crimes were horrible to hear.
God, though, unendingly is good. His arms
enfold and grasp all those who turn to Him.
124* And if Cosenza’s pastor, who was sent
to hunt me down by Clement (then our pope),
had read aright the face God turned to mine,
127 my body’s bones would still be where they were,
near Benevento where the bridge head falls,
guarded by that great cairn of heavy stones.
130 The rain now bathes them, and they’re moved by wind,
beyond the Kingdom down the Green Stream’s bank
to which he’d carried them with torches dimmed.
133 No one, while hope shows any hint of green,
is lost beyond return to love eternal
merely because the Church has voiced its curse.

136 It is, however, true that those who die,
although repentant, in contempt of Church,
are bound to stay outside this mountain wall
139 some thirty times the span of years that they
presumed to stand apart – if this decree
is not made shorter by good works of prayer.
142 Now see if you can bring me happiness,
revealing to my Constance that you’ve seen
where I am now, and understood this ban.
145 For here we greatly gain from those down there.’

CANTO 4

1* When, through enjoyment (or indeed through pain)
which takes possession of some inner strength,
the soul is gathered up round that alone,
4 it can’t, it seems, pay heed to other powers.
And this refutes the error that maintains
the soul ignites in us in multiples.
7 When something, therefore, that is heard or seen
holds in its thrall the lower act of soul,
time passes by, and we don’t notice it.
10 For these are diﬀerent powers – the one that hears,
the one residing in the total soul –
the ﬁrst (let’s say) is bound, the other free.
13 I had my own experience of this,
hearing that spirit, marvelling at his words.
For now the sun, although I had not seen,
16 had risen fully ﬁve-times-ten degrees when
we arrived where all these souls, as one,
cried out to us: ‘It’s here, what you demand.’
19 A farmer, when the grapes are growing dark,
with one scant forkful of his hedging thorn
will often stuﬀ a wider gap than this,
22 that corridor through which my lord and guide
now climbed – I following behind, alone
since all the company, by now, had gone.
25* San Leo you can scale, edge down to Noli,
climb to Bismantova, ascend Cacume.

Feet serve you there. But here you need to ﬂy – 28 with
quickening wings, I mean, and pinions
of great desire, behind that leading-on
that oﬀers me all hope and gives me light.
31 We scrambled through the bore of shattered rock.
On every side its edges tightened round.
The ground beneath us called for feet and hands.
34 And when we’d reached the rim above that cliﬀ,
and came to where the slope was opening out,
‘What path, sir,’ I inquired, ‘shall we take now?’
37 And he to me: ‘Don’t let your footsteps slide.
Just follow me. We’ll gain ground on this mount until some
escort comes who knows the way.’
40 The summit was so high it conquered sight.
The slope stood proud, its incline far more steep than
(point to centre) forty-ﬁve degrees.
43 I was all in, and so began to say:
‘Look round, my dearest father. Turn and see,
if you don’t stop, I’m stuck here all alone.’
46 And he said: ‘Son, just drag yourself up there,’
his ﬁnger pointing to a ledge beyond
that ran around the ﬂank of that sheer slope.
49 His words so stirred me to renewed attempts,
I forced myself to track him, hands and knees,
till that encirclement was at my feet.
52 And there we came and sat, the two of us,
turned to the east where we had made our climb
(for looking back will often cheer you up).
55 I set my eyes on, ﬁrst, the shores below,
then raised them to the sun, and was amazed
to see its light assail us from the left.
58* The poet noticed that I stood struck dumb
so stupeﬁed to see light’s chariot
process between us and the Aquilon.
61 ‘If Castor,’ he replied, ‘and Pollux were
now standing in conjunction with the glass

that draws its mirror light both north and south, 64 you
then would see the rose-red Zodiac
wheel still more tightly round the Ursa stars – so long as
it’s not left its former track.
67 And if you need to get your mind round that,
imagine Zion – harvest that within –
and how that mountain stands upon the globe,
70 so that, though set in diﬀerent hemispheres,
the same horizon bounds that Mount and this.
From which you’ll see (if you think clearly now) 73 the
road where Phaeton had no skill to drive
was bound to travel north of that mid-line,
and south, conversely, of Jerusalem.’
76 ‘Oh, sir!’ I said. ‘With such great certitude
I’ve never seen as clearly as I do,
(I’d not intelligence enough for that)
79* how that mid-circle of supernal force
(in certain texts termed “Equatorial”
which always stands between the sun and chill,
82 veers, for the reason that you gave, as far
towards the northern clime of seven stars
as Hebrews see it bend to warmer parts.
85 But, if you please, I’d really like to know
how far we’ve yet to travel. This slope climbs
higher by far than eyes of mine can go.’
88 And he: ‘This mountain is by nature such
that, down below, the start is always hard,
yet hurts far less the more one rises up.
91 And so when you will ﬁnd the going smooth,
ﬂoating as lightly upwards in ascent
as boats that travel down a ﬂowing stream,
94 you’ll then have reached the end of this rough path.
Await that point to rest your weariness.
I’ll say no more. I know the truth of this.’
97* The moment he had ﬁnished speaking so,
a voice rang out close by us: ‘Well, perhaps

you’ll need a good sit-down before you do.’
100 On hearing this, we both of us turned round,
and saw, towards our left, a bulky rock
of which, at ﬁrst, we’d neither been aware.
103 We drew ourselves across. Some persons there
were sitting in the shadow of that stone,
in postures, one might say, of negligence.
106 And one of those, who seemed to me worn out,
was sitting with his arms around his knees,
holding his face bowed heavily between.
109 ‘My dearest lord,’ I said, ‘just look at him –
at that one there who seems more negligent
than if his sister were Pure Indolence.’
112 At this he turned a bit, to pay us heed,
moving his cheek to look along his thigh.
‘All right,’ he said. ‘Head up, you big, strong lad!’
115 I knew then who he was. And all the aches
that made my breath still come a little fast
could not prevent me from approaching him.
118 I reached him and he hardly raised his head,
saying: ‘You’ve seen now, have you, how the sun leads to
the left its chariot at your back?’
121 His curt expressions and his sluggish turns
had moved my lips, a little, to a smile.
‘Belacqua,’ I began, ‘I need not now
124 grieve for you any longer. But say why
you’re sat down here. You’re waiting for a guide?
Or are you back again to your old ways?’
127 ‘Brother’ he said, ‘what point in going up?’
God’s angel, sitting at the gate up there,
would not admit me to the Penances.
130 The heavens must circle ﬁrst around me here
the length of time they did around my life
(since I delayed good sighs until my end)
133 unless, before that, prayer has brought me aid,
rising on high from hearts that live in grace.

What else – since Heaven won’t hear – is any use?’
136 The poet now was climbing further on,
saying: ‘Come! Come! The high meridian – look! – is
touched by sun. Along the western shore,
139 the foot of night is falling on Maroc.’

CANTO 5

1 Already some way past the shadow folk,
I climbed still onward in my leader’s track,
until, below us, one of them burst out:
4 ‘See that?’ – a ﬁnger pointing long – ‘The one behind!
No sun ray shines, it seems, towards his left!
And doesn’t he behave as though alive?’
7 On hearing these sharp words, I turned my eyes,
and saw them gazing in astonishment,
at me – yes, me! – and the broken sunlight.
10 ‘Why let your thoughts get tangled up like that?’
(My master speaks.) ‘It only slows your stride.
And why be bothered by their whisperings?
13 Keep close behind me. Let them say their say.
Stand straight, a mighty tower unwavering,
its height unshaken by such breaths of wind.
16 When thought is bred too rampantly from thought,
then, of himself, a man will miss his mark.
Each mental thrust debilitates the ﬁrst.’
19 What answer could I oﬀer, save ‘I come’?
I said so, sprinkled by that blushing hue
that, on occasion, means we merit pardon.
22* Meanwhile, across the angle of our climb,
there now appeared ahead another group,
intoning, verse by verse, the ‘Miserere’ .
25 But when they saw my limbs would not allow
a thoroughfare to any ray of light,
they changed their chanting to a long, hoarse ‘Oooh!’

28 Then two, who acted as their nuncios,
hurried to meet us with the urgent plea:
‘What is your standing here? Please let us know.’
31 My master answered: ‘You may now return
and bear to those who sent you this reply:
“This man, in body, is true ﬂesh and bone.”
34 And if, as I suppose they did, they stopped
because they saw that shade, these words should serve.
Let them all honour him. He’ll pay them well.’
37* Vapours, when kindled in night’s early hours,
ﬂash across tranquil skies like meteors,
and August clouds are cleft by setting suns.
40 Yet none I’ve ever seen went up as quick
as these two messengers, who turned, once there,
with all the rest, to us – a herd in rampage.
43 ‘They’ll come in multitudes,’ the poet said,
‘and mill around and pester you for prayers.
So listen as you go, but still press on.’
46 ‘You there, that soul now set for happiness’
(they yelled their greeting) ‘with your limbs intact as ever
you were born! Slow down a bit!
49 Look! Is there anyone you’ve seen before?
You might, if so, bear news of them beyond.
Ah! Where to now? Ah! Why don’t you stand still?
52 We all were victims of some violent death,
yet sinners till we reached our ﬁnal hour.
Then Heaven’s light dawned and made us see things
clear, 55 so that, repenting and forgiving all,
we came from life remade at peace with God,
who heartens our desire to see Him still.’
58 ‘I stare into your eyes,’ I answered them,
‘and recognize no single one. Yet you
are spirits born anew to good. And all
61 you wish – and I can do – I shall. Please say.
I swear this by the peace that leads me on
from world to world, pursuing this great guide.’

64* Then one began: ‘You need not swear to that.
Granted your will is not cut short by “can’t”,
each of us trusts that you will bring some good.
67 May I (who’ll only speak till others do)
entreat you, if you’ve seen those lands that lie
between Romagna and the realm of Charles,
70 that you, in all your kindness, pray for me
in Fano – so entreaties oﬀered there
may give me strength to cleanse my grievous sins.
73 I was from Fano. But the hollow wounds
from which the blood by which I lived ran down,
were dealt me by the Antenorians.
76 I thought my safety was, with them, assured.
The Estes got it ﬁxed, their spite to me
exceeding all that justice could require.
79 If only I had ﬂed towards La Mira
– they caught me as I ran to Oriaco –
my place would be where men breathe, even now.
82 Towards the marsh I ran, where – brackish reeds
entwining me – I fell, watching as, in this mire, a lake
spread outwards, forming from my veins.’
85 ‘May your desires be met’ (another spoke)
‘that draw you to the mountain height. Then, please, take
pity. In your goodness, aid my own.
88* I am – once Montefeltran – now Buonconte.
Giovanna does not pray for me. None cares.
And so, among all these, I walk, brow lowered.’
91* ‘No one has ever known,’ I said, ‘your place
of burial. What led you – chance? or was it force? – away,
at Campaldino, from the kill?’
94 ‘Ah!’ he replied. ‘A stream – the Archiano – runs
across the lower Casentino hills,
born above Hermitage-in-Apennine.
97 I’d got to where this river’s title fails,
ﬂeeing on foot, and wounded in my throat,
a line of blood behind me on the plain.

100 And now I lost my sight. And all my words
ended in uttering Maria’s name.
I fell – my ﬂesh alone remaining there.
103 But tell the living this – I’ll speak the truth –
God’s angel laid his hands on me. Hell shrieked:
“Why do you rob me, Heavenspawn, of this?
106 You’d prise him from me for one little tear,
and carry oﬀ his everlasting part?
Well, I’ll rule otherwise the other half!”
109 Humid evaporations (as you know)
collect in air, then, rising to the grip
of freezing air, return to earth as rain.
112 There now arrived the Evil Urge – who seeks,
in mind, for nothing if not ill – and stirred,
through powers its nature gives, wind, murk and fog.
115* And when the light of day had been put out,
he draped the vale in clouds, from Pratomagno
to reach the summit of the mountain range
118 and made the skies condense till gravid air
was turned, once more, to water. Whatever
earth refused to bear ran oﬀ in runnels.
121 And when these streams in torrents were conjoined,
these rushed towards the sovereign river course
with such great speed that nothing held them back.
124 The Archiano – furious, in spate – had found
my body at its outlet, rigid, chill.
It drove this to the Arno, loosing there
127 the cross that, lost in agony, my arms had formed.
From bank to riverbed, it swirled me round,
then wrapped and hid me in its muddy spoil.’
130* ‘When you return, pray Heaven, to the world,
and, having rested from long travelling’
(with these few words a third soul joined the group) 133
‘please, do remember me. I am La Pia.
Siena made me, unmade by Maremma.
And he knows this who, once I wore his ring,

136 took me in marriage with his own bright gem.’

CANTO 6

1 When punters split oﬀ from some gambling game,
the loser stays behind, all misery,
to check the throws once more and, sadly, learn,
4 while, with the winner, all the rest go oﬀ.
Some buttonhole the man, some pluck his tails,
and some his sleeve – ‘Just think of me,’ they mean.
7 Though hearing each of them, he does not pause,
his hands fend all away, to make them stop.
So he defends himself from this great press.
10 Well, that was me, in that dense crowd of souls,
turning my face to this side, then to that.
By promising each one, I got away.
13* The Aretine was there who met his end
at vicious Ghin di Tacco’s scything arm,
he, too, who, running with the hunt, had drowned.
16 And here as well, with hands stretched out in prayer,
was Frederick Novello and that Pisan man
who made the clan Marzucco’s power appear.
19 I saw Count Orso, and the man whose soul
was severed from his limbs, so he declared,
by spite and envy and no crime of his.
22 I mean Pierre la Brosse – and, while still there,
just let the lady of Brabant (lest she
be herded with the worst for that) take care.
25 As soon as I got free from all these shades –
who went still praying for another’s prayer
to speed them on their way to holiness –

28 I thus began: ‘It seems that you, my Light,
deny overtly in a certain text
that prayers can ever bend what Heaven dictates.
31 And yet these folk are praying just for that.
Could it then be the hopes they have are vain?
Or is it that your words aren’t clear to me?’
34 And he to me: ‘The words I write are plain.
And yet, if you look closely with sane thought,
the hope that these all have will never fail.
37 God’s justice at its summit does not sink
because, in one sharp point, the ﬁre of love
completes what those who dwell here expiate.
40 So, in the passage where I made this point,
no ﬂaw could ever be redeemed by prayer.
For prayer was then not linked or joined to God.
43 Yet do not, truly, let your question rest
until the one who’ll come as light between
your intellect and truth declares you may.
46 I don’t know if you take my sense. I mean
Beatrice. You’ll see her up above,
smiling, in all her happiness, on the crest.’
49 ‘My lord,’ I said, ‘let’s move with greater haste.
I’m not as wearied as I was before.
And – look – the mountain’s casting shadow now.’
52 ‘While daylight lasts,’ he answered me, ‘we’ll press
our way as far ahead as we still can.
But things have not the shape that you suppose.
55 Before you reach that height, you’ll see return
the one who now is hidden by the ridge –
so you cannot, now, break the light he sheds.
58* But over there you see a soul alone,
alone placed there who stares across at us.
This one will teach us what’s the quickest way.’
61 We came towards it. O you Lombard soul!
How proud you stood, how haughty in your look,
your moving eye so grave and digniﬁed.

64 The soul did not say anything at all.
It let us make our way, still looking on,
as hunting lions do that pause and couch.
67 But Virgil went across to him, and asked
that we be shown a better path to climb.
To this request, the soul made no reply.
70 About our origins, our towns and lives,
he questioned us. My thoughtful guide began:
‘Mantua…’ The shade – so dark-cowled, sunk within – 73
rose up towards him from where ﬁrst he’d been,
saying: ‘You Mantuan! I am Sordello.
Your fellow citizen.’ And each round each ﬂung arms.
76 You! Vile Italia! Sorrow’s resting place!
You hulk that no one steers through raging storms!
No sovereign lady, you’re a cat house whore!
79 That noble soul was moved with such great speed
to greet his fellow citizen, to hear –
no more than that! – the sweet sound of their home.
82 Yet those who live within your boundaries
stand nowhere free of war. Each gnaws the next,
all locked together by one wall and moat.
85 Search hard, you wretch, round all your ocean shores
then turn towards your heart, and try to see
if any of its parts rejoice in peace.
88* Why should Justinian have formed your reins?
What use is that? The saddle’s riderless.
The shame would be far less were there no curb.
91 You people! If you only understood
what God intends you’d be more reverent,
and let the saddle be great Caesar’s seat.
94 Just look how ﬁerce and cruel the beast’s become.
No spur to set it on its proper course,
since you, Italia, took the bridle up.
97* You German Albert! You abandon her,
so hard to handle now, untamed and wild,
you who should sit astride her saddle bows.

100 May justice from the stars fall, rightly, down
on your tribe’s blood. May that come strange and clear, to
make your heir feel all the dread of it.
103 Held back in Germany by raging greed,
your father did – as you now – tolerate
the Empire’s garden to lie desolate.
106* Come! See the Montagues and Capulets,
Monaldi, Filippeschi, reckless men,
some plunged in misery and some in fear!
109* Come, cruel man, and see the great distress
of all your nobles. Cure them of their warts.
You’ll see how Santa Fiora is eclipsed.
112 Come now, and see that Rome of yours in tears.
Widowed and lonely, day and night she weeps:
‘Say why, dear Caesar, you’re not with me now.’
115 Come now, and see the love between these folk.
And if no pity for us makes you move,
come, be ashamed to know what name you’ve won.
118 And if, great Jove, once cruciﬁed for us,
it is permissible for me to say,
then why are Your just eyes now turned elsewhere?
121 Or is all this a preparation, formed
within the chasm of Your wisdom, for some good
cut oﬀ completely from our power to see?
124* In Italy, the cities are all full
of petty despots. Every country lout
who joins a gang is rebel Marcellus.
127 Dear Florence, you may well content yourself
with this parenthesis, which can’t touch you,
all thanks, of course, to your so brilliant crew.
130 Many, though true at heart, are slow to shoot,
for fear, without advice, they’d rush the bow.
But your lot tongue-tip justice all the time.
133 Many refuse to take on public tasks.
But your lot, so solicitous, unasked,
reply with shouts: ‘Let me! I’m up for that!’

136 Look happy now. You’ve every reason to,
rich as you are, at peace and oh-so-wise.
The outcome does not hide that I speak true.
139* Athens and Lacedaemon, which ﬁrst made
the ancient law, and were so civilized,
made, as to living well, the faintest mark
142 compared to you who make such delicate
provisions in your laws that what you spin
won’t reach from mid-October to November’s end.
145 How many times within your memory
have you, renewing all your limbs, transformed
duties and laws and coinage and customs?
148 And if you’ll know yourself and see the light,
you’ll see how like you are to some sick hag,
who ﬁnds no comfort on her feather bed,
152 but shields herself from pain with every squirm.

CANTO 7

1 Three or four times, with solemn happiness,
the welcome each gave each had been renewed
till, drawing back, Sordello said: ‘Who are you?’
4 ‘Before the time that souls were turned, when ﬁt,
in dignity, for God, to this great mount,
my bones were buried by Octavian.
7 I am Vergilius. And for no crime,
save lack of faith, I lost the heavenly sky.’
This was the answer that my lord then gave.
10 Like someone on the sudden who, before
his eyes, sees what he can’t help marvelling at, can’t
credit it but does, and says ‘It is…It’s not…’, 13 so did
Sordello, and he bent his brow,
then, turning back to Virgil, ﬂung once more
his arms round where inferiors embrace.
16 ‘You glory of the Latin race,’ he said,
‘through you our tongue was shown what it could do.
Eternal honour of where I, once, was.
19 What merit or what grace shows you to me?
If I am ﬁt to listen to your words,
say – if you come from Hell – what cloister’s yours.’
22 ‘Through all the circles of the grieving realm
I’ve come,’ he answered him, ‘and now I’m here.
A power in Heaven ﬁrst moved me. So I come.
25 Through nothing I had done but what I’d not ,
my sight lost that great Sun that you desire,
known too belatedly in time for me.

28* There is a place down there not grim with pain
but only with sad shades whose deep laments
sound not as screams but melancholy sighs.
31 I take my place with children – innocents
in whom the bite of death set lethal teeth
before they’d been made free of human sin.
34 And there I stay with all who were not clothed
in those three holy virtues – though I knew,
and, guiltless, followed all the other four.
37 But give us – if you know and can – some sign
so we can come more quickly to the place
at which the proper Purgatory begins.’
40 He answered: ‘No ﬁxed ground is given us.
I am allowed to travel up and round.
As far as I can go, I’ll be your guide.
43 But look! The day by now is going down.
And none by night can ever make the climb.
Better to think of some good resting place.
46 There are, towards the right, souls hidden here.
I’ll lead you on to them, if you agree,
and you’ll not want for pleasure, knowing them.’
49 ‘But how is that?’ the answer came. ‘Would those
who wished to make ascent at night be checked
by someone else, or simply lack the power?’
52 Sordello drew his ﬁnger on the ground,
saying – that good man – ‘There! You see that line?
You could not cross it once the sun was down.
55 Not, though, because there’s anything to bar
your going up, save shadows of the night.
It’s that which knots the will in powerlessness.
58 We could, of course, descend and walk below
and, while the far horizons keep day shut,
wander and take a turn around the coast.’
61 My lord, then, as though wondering at these words,
replied: ‘So lead us on to where, you say,
it’s possible to linger in delight.’

64 We’d only gone a little way from there
when, so I saw, the mountain hollowed out,
as, here, our valleys hollow earthly hills.
67 ‘Just over there!’ the shade now said to us.
‘We’ll go to where the cliﬀ has formed a lap, and there
await the coming of new day.’
70 Slanting between the level and the steep,
a tight path led us to the dale’s low edge –
the bank’s rim here diminishing to half.
73 Gold, ﬁnest silver, cochineal, white lead,
indigo, ebony polished to a sheen,
the freshest emeralds when they’ve just been split, 76
each in pure colour would be overcome
by all the ﬂowers and grasses in that fold –
as by the greater any lesser is.
79 Nor had great nature worked in paint alone.
She also with a thousand perfumes wrought
a sweetness never known and indistinct.
82* ‘Salve, Regina’ . on the ﬂowering greens,
the souls, I saw, not seen beyond the vale,
all sat together as they sang this hymn.
85 ‘Until what little sun remains nests down,’
the Mantuan who’d led us there began,
‘don’t ask me to escort you down to them.
88 You’ll better see by staying on this ledge
the faces, looks and gestures of these kings
than if you’d been received within their glade.
91* The one who’s seated highest, and (in look)
neglected what his proper duty urged,
and does not move his lips while others sing,
94 was Rudolph who, as emperor, could have healed
the wounds that did Italia to death
so that no others will revive her soon.
97 The next, who seems to oﬀer him support,
ruled in that country where those waters rise
that bear to Elbe the Moldau and the Elbe to sea.

100 His name was Ottakar – a better prince,
even when baby-clothed, than Wenceslaus,
his son who, bearded, grazed on lust and ease.
103 And that one – button-nosed – who seems so caught
in conversation with the kind-faced man
died, ﬂeeing, as he stripped the lily ﬂower.
106 Look at him! how he pounds on his own breast.
And see the next who’s spread his palm to form a bed on
which to lay his sighing cheek.
109 Father these are and in-law to the Ill
of France. His vicious, ﬁlthy life they know – and hence the
grief transﬁxing each alike.
112* And that lord there – the burly type – who sings
in concert with the one of manly nose,
bore, as his knightly belt, all worth and strength.
115 And if that young boy sitting at his back
could still, succeeding him, have been the king, true merit
would have ﬂowed from urn to urn – 118 which none
could argue of his other heirs.
For James and Frederick rule his kingdoms now
and no one holds his better heritage.
121 It seldom happens that man’s probity
will rise through every branch. He wills it thus, so, given
from beyond, it’s known as His.
124 These words go out to that one with the nose
no less than to Pier, who sings with him,
whom Puglia and Provence already mourn.
127 The tree is that much less than its own seed,
as Constance can applaud her husband more
than Marguerite and Beatrice can.
130* See there the monarch of the simple life,
Henry of England, sitting all alone.
He in his branches comes much better oﬀ.
133 The one among them lower, on the ground,
is Marquis William, looking to the heights.
For him, the wars of Alessandria

136 make Canavese and Montferrat weep.

CANTO 8

1 It was, by now, the hour that turns to home
the longing thoughts of seamen, melting hearts
the day they’ve said goodbye to dearest friends,
4* and when by love the pilgrim, new to this,
is pierced to hear, far oﬀ, the evening bell
that seems to mourn the dying of the day,
7 as I began to blank my hearing out,
and gaze in wonder at a single soul
who, risen up, hand raised, asked all to hear.
10 This soul, ﬁrst, joined his palms then lifted them,
eyes ﬁxed towards the orient, as though
to say to God: ‘For nothing else I care.’
13 ‘Te lucis ante’ issued from his lips
with such devotion and each note so sweet
it made me wander out of conscious thought.
16 Then, sweetly and devoutly, all the rest,
their eyes all turned to those supernal wheels,
picked up from him and sang the hymn in full.
19* Reader, now ﬁx a needle eye on truth.
The veil is, after all, so gauzy here
you’ll thread it through as lightly as can be.
22 I saw the noble army of those souls
in silence turn their gaze towards the sky –
as though awaiting something – meek and pale.
25 And then I saw, descending from the height,
two angels with two swords, each ﬂashing ﬁre,
the point of each was blunt and broken oﬀ.

28 As green as are the freshest newborn leaves,
so were their garments, fanned by bright, green wings
which, drawn behind them, rustled as they beat.
31 One came to stand a little from our heads.
The other lighted on the farther bank.
The people, thus, were held between the two.
34 Their hair was blond. And this I clearly saw.
But looking at their faces, sight was lost –
as natural powers fail, tested to excess.
37 ‘These two,’ as now Sordello said, ‘have come
as guardians of the vale, from Mary’s breast,
against the serpent who’ll soon pass this way.’
40 I, ignorant of where the snake would come,
span all around and huddled closer up,
frozen with dread, to Virgil’s trusted side.
43 Sordello once again spoke out: ‘Let’s go
and talk down there among those famous shades.
To see you will, for them, be welcome grace.’
46 Three paces only had I gone, perhaps,
and there I was. And one of them, I saw,
stared, wondering who I was, at me (yes, me!).
49 The time had come when air was turning black –
not yet so dark, though, that, between our eyes,
what ﬁrst had been locked up should not be clear.
52* He made towards me, as I did to him.
Noble judge Nino, how it pleased me then
to see you weren’t among the guilty souls.
55 No courteous welcome now remained unsaid.
‘How long,’ he asked, ‘since, over distant waves,
you reached the foothills that surround this shore?’
58 ‘Oh! Through unhappy regions,’ I replied,
‘I came at dawn. I’m still in my ﬁrst life –
though travelling here, I gain the other, too.’
61 And once the meaning of my words was heard,
he (and Sordello, also) drew away,
as people do when suddenly confused.

64 One turned to Virgil, while the other turned
to someone sitting there, and cried aloud:
‘Conrad, get up! Just see what God’s grace wills!’
67 Then facing me: ‘I pray you – by the thanks,
so singular, you owe to Him who hides
His ﬁrst “because” so none can pass that stream,
70 when once you’re back beyond the far-ﬂung sea,
then tell my dear Giovanna she should call,
on my behalf, to where the pure are heard.
73 I do not think her mother loves me now.
For she has changed her widowhood’s white veil –
which, wretchedly, she’ll yearn for once again.
76 Because of her, one readily can see
how long the ﬁre of love in women lasts,
if eye and touch don’t often kindle it.
79 The viper of the Milanese camp
will make for her less splendid burial
than my Gallurian cockerel would have done.’
82 He said all this, his face marked by the stamp
of that true zeal that burned with measured ﬂame
within him in his truest heart of hearts.
85 My eyes still, avidly, were on the skies
ﬁxed where the stars ran slowest in their track,
as wheels do closest to the axle tree.
88 My guide: ‘Dear son, what do you see up there?’
‘Those three sharp torches,’ I replied to him,
‘with which the southern pole is all ablaze.’
91 His answer to me was: ‘The four bright stars
that you saw just this morning sink down there.
And these have risen now to where they were.’
94 As he said this, Sordello drew him close,
saying: ‘Look there! You see? Our enemy!’
He stretched his ﬁnger, showing where to look.
97 From that side where this little valley had
no sheltering barrier, a snake appeared,
perhaps like that which fed Eve bitter food.

100 Through grass and ﬂowers this evil smear came on,
rolling its head around from time to time,
licking its back as preening beasts will do.
103 I did not see – and so I cannot say –
how those celestial hawks began to move.
I did, though, see the motion that each made.
106 Sensing the air ripped open by green wings,
the serpent ﬂed and both the angels turned,
ﬂying at equal pace, to their high posts.
109* The shadow that had drawn, when called, towards
the judge, had not, throughout this whole attack,
at any point released me from his gaze.
112 ‘May that great lamp that leads you to the height
discern in your free will suﬃcient wax
to light your way to that ﬂower-studded peak,’
115 (so he began). ‘If you have truthful news
of Val di Magra or the neighbouring place,
then tell me. I was once a great man there.
118 I was, by name, Currado Malaspina,
not the great ancient but of his descent.
I bore love – here reﬁned – towards my kin.’
121 ‘Oh! I have never been,’ I said, ‘through lands
of yours. Yet who in Europe anywhere
is there to whom your name is not well known?
124 The fame that brings such lustre to your house
exalts your lords, exalts all your domains,
so that all know it, though they’ve not been there.
127 I swear to you (so may I reach the heights!)
that your much-honoured race goes still unstripped of
worthiness and prize in purse and sword.
130 Nature and how they act so honours them
that, though the world’s vile head may twist awry, they all
walk straight, and scorn the evil way.’
133 And he: ‘Go on like that. The sun won’t sink
within the bed that Ram Stars – all four feet
astraddle – cover for more than seven times

136 before the courtesy that you express
is nailed within the centre of your brain
with greater nails than hearsay brings to you –
139 if judgement is not halted in its course.’

CANTO 9

1* The concubine of timeworn Tithonus
already on the eastern balcony,
out of her dear love’s arms, was glimmering white.
4 Her forehead shone with gemstones in the form
of that chill animal, the Scorpion,
that strikes then stings us with its vicious tail.
7 The night which rises step by step had now,
where we’d arrived, advanced by two of these,
the third already lowering on the wing,
10 when I – some trace of Adam with me still –
conquered by sleep, bowed down towards the grass
where all the ﬁve of us had come to sit.
13* In that hour when the swallow, near to dawn,
begins once more her long sad chant, perhaps
recalling all the miseries she’d borne,
16 and when our minds like hawks on foreign tracks
furthest from ﬂesh, least caught in their own thoughts, are
near divine in visions that they see,
19 as in some dream, there hovering, it seemed
I saw an eagle in the sky. Its plumes were gold,
its wings wide spread, its purpose soon to swoop.
22 And I, it seemed to me, was where the kin
of Ganymede, when he was seized – swept up
towards the highest court – remained abandoned.
25* Just to myself, ‘Perhaps,’ I thought, ‘this strikes
only by habit here, perhaps it scorns
to carry things from elsewhere in its claws.’

28 And then it seemed that, wheeling slightly round,
as terrible as lightning, down it struck
and tore me upwards to the sphere of ﬁre.
31 And there the eagle and I, it seemed, both blazed.
And this imagined ﬁre so scorched and seared
that, yielding, dreaming sleep just had to break.
34* Not very diﬀerently, Achilles woke,
his startled eyes now staring all around,
dazed, knowing nothing of where he might be,
37 his mother having ﬂed with him asleep
within her arms from Chiron’s care to Skyros.
(The Greeks would, after, make him leave that place.) 40
So too I shook myself as, from my face,
sleep ﬂed, and deathly pale I then became,
turning, as terriﬁed we do, to ice.
43 Beside me, there was only my great strength.
The sun by now was more than two hours high.
My eyes were turned back down towards the sea.
46 My lord said, ‘Have no fear. Be conﬁdent.
For we have reached a good point in our way.
Do not hold back, but give your strengths free rein.
49 You’ve now arrived where Purgatory begins.
See over there the wall encircling it.
See there the portal where the wall is breached.
52 Just now, at dawn which comes before new day,
when still your soul was sleeping deep within,
couched on the ﬂowers that ornament that place,
55* a lady came. She said, “I am Lucia.
Let me take up the man who’s sleeping there,
so I can make his journey easier.”
58 Sordello and those noble forms stayed back.
She took you up and, once the day shone clear,
she came up here, I following in her steps.
61 She laid you down. But, ﬁrst, her lovely eyes
displayed to me the entrance open there.
Then she and sleep that instant went away.’

64 As, doubting, people do when reassured –
changing to conﬁdence the fears they had,
once what is true has been revealed to them –
67 so I, too, changed. And since my leader saw
that I had now no cares, he moved to climb,
with me behind him still, the wall towards its height.
70 You, reader, can now see how here I raise
the theme my verse attempts. Don’t marvel, then,
if with more craft and art I strengthen it.
73 We now drew closer and were in that part
where, ﬁrst, as I had thought, a breach appeared,
as might some ﬁssure that divides a wall.
76* And now I saw a gate and, leading there,
three steps beneath, each coloured diﬀerently,
and at that gate a guardian who spoke no word.
79 And as I opened more my eyes to this,
I saw him sitting on the highest stair.
His face was such I could not bear that light.
82 A naked sword he held within his hand
which so reﬂected sun rays back at me
that many times I ﬁxed my eyes in vain.
85 ‘Speak from back there! And say what is your will.’
So he began. ‘And tell me, where’s your guide?
Take care, lest going up should cause you harm.’
88 ‘From Heaven, a lady, knowing all these things,
told us a short time past,’ my teacher answered,
“‘Go forward for the gate you seek is here.’”
91 ‘May she advance your steps in doing well,’
once more the courteous guardian began:
‘Come forward, therefore, to these stairs of ours.’
94 And there we came to them. The ﬁrst great block
was marble, white, so burnished and so clean
that I as I appear was mirroired there.
97 The second, in its tint more dark than perse,
was rock – waste, rough to touch and scorched and dry,
cracked both across and upward to its height.

100 The third, which, massively, weighed these two down,
was porphyry, it seemed, and ﬂamed as bright
as fresh blood spurting from a severed vein.
103 And, on this third, the angel of the Lord
had placed both feet and sat across the threshold,
which, as it seemed, was adamantine stone.
106 Up these three steps, impelled by good intent,
my leader drew me, saying: ‘Humbly ask
that he undo the lock that holds the door.’
109 I fell devoutly at his holy feet
and asked that he, for mercy, open it.
But, ﬁrst, three times I beat upon my breast.
112* He then sketched seven ‘Ps’ across my brow,
written with sword point. ‘When you’re once within, make
sure,’ he said, ‘you go and wash these scars.’
115 The vestments that he wore would be, in hue,
the same as ash or soil when dug out dry.
Then from beneath his robes he drew two keys.
118* One key was silver and the other gold.
With ﬁrst the white, then yellow after that,
he worked the door so I was well content.
121 ‘Whenever either of these keys falls short
and fails to turn correctly in its lock,
this path,’ he said, ‘will not then open up.
124 One is more precious, but the other needs
much greater art and skill to make it turn.
This is the one that gets the knot undone.
127 From Peter I receive these keys – who said,
when penitents have bowed down to my feet,
“Err more in opening than in locking out.” ‘
130 He pushed the panels of the sacred gate,
saying: ‘Go in. But be aware of this,
that those who look behind return outside.’
133 And when the pivots of that sacred hall,
forged out of resonantly massive steel,
were wrenched around within their housing hinge,

136* no roar was heard, no harsher sound was made,
by Tarpeian doors, when from them honest
Metellus was dragged – doors that were henceforth lean.
139* I turned, attentive when the thunder broke,
and, seemingly, ‘Te Deum laudamus’
was heard, as voices mixed in that sweet tune.
142 The sounds I heard brought back into my mind
the same impression that we often get
when organs play, accompanying a voice.
145 Now, yes, we hear the words; now, no, we don’t.

CANTO 10

1 Now, both within the threshold of that gate
(our souls won’t use it, out of ill-bent love
which makes the crooked way, to us, seem straight) 4 I
heard it closed, resoundingly, again.
Yet if I’d turned to set my eyes on that,
what adequate excuse could there have been?
7 We climbed now through a trough of ﬁssured rock
that moved, on either side, this way and that,
as waves do, surging near, then running back.
10 ‘We’ll need,’ my lord began, ‘a certain skill
to keep together tight against the curve
that, ebbing here and there, avoids the swell.’
13 This made our footsteps few and hesitant.
And so the moon, which now was on the wane,
had reached its bed, to lie once more at rest,
16 before we’d gone beyond that needle eye.
But once we did get free and opened up,
climbing to where the mountain gathered in –
19 I all worn out and both of us unsure
of where to make our way – we paused upon
a road far lonelier than any desert track.
22 If measured from the edge that marked the void,
towards the foot of that still-soaring mount,
the span would be three human body lengths.
25 And, be it to the left side or the right,
as far as eyesight could extend its wings,
the ledge, in circuit, seemed to me the same.

28 We’d still to move our feet towards those heights
when I perceived that, all around, the bank –
which, rising straight, lacked any upward route – 31* was
marble, brilliant white, and all adorned
with carved reliefs so ﬁne that Polyclite,
or even Nature, would have there felt scorned.
34* The angel, reaching earth with that decree
of peace – so wept-for over centuries –
which opened Heaven’s long-forbidden gates,
37 appeared so truthfully before us now,
carved in a gesture of pure gentleness,
he did not seem an image keeping silence.
40 In truth, one might have said he spoke the ‘Ave’ .
For in that image was the one who turned
the key that opened out the utmost Love.
43 And from her stance and bearing there shone out
(exactly as an imprint sealed in wax)
‘Ecce ancilla Dei’ , word for word.
46 ‘Don’t keep your mind ﬁxed only on one part.’
These words my teacher gently spoke to me.
(I held him where all others have their heart.)
49 And so, in sight, I moved. And I could see,
behind Maria, on the side where he,
in urging me to make a move, now stood,
52 set in the rock, another narrative.
Passing by Virgil, I came near to that,
so that it stood displayed before my eyes.
55* Carved there – in marble, also – was the cart,
with oxen, carrying the Holy Ark
(because of which we dread unsanctioned deeds).
58 Before the Ark were people, as it seemed,
gathered in seven choirs who made my sense –
hearing and sight – say, ‘No’, and, ‘Yes, they sing.’
61 In that same way, the incense smoke, which there
was imaged, worked on eye and nose, so these
were not concordant as to ‘no’ and ‘yes’.

64 Before that vessel of all holiness,
the humble psalmist danced, his robe tucked up – both
more and less than king in all of this.
67 Then Michal, opposite, was gazing down,
as from some window of the royal court,
an eﬃgy of rancour and disdain.
70 I turned my feet away from where I’d stood
to note another story, close at hand,
its gleam beyond the ‘Michal’, showing white.
73* En-storied here was found the glorious deed
of that high prince of Rome whose prowess moved
Pope Gregory to win great victory.
76 I speak of Trajan, noble Emperor.
A widow there had snatched his horse’s rein,
her gestures those of grief and bitter tears.
79 Around him, surging horsemen, as it seemed,
ﬁlled all the space. And eagles, wrought in gold, were
seen above, as moving in the wind.
82 The wretched widow, as these thronged around,
was saying, seemingly: ‘My lord, avenge
my dearest son. He’s dead. That is my heart-wound!’
85 He, seemingly, replied to her: ‘Just wait.
I shall return.’ And she: ‘My lord’ – as though
her agony were quickening all the more –
88 ‘but if you don’t return?’ And he: ‘The one
who’s where I am will act.’ And she: ‘How can
his good be yours when you forget your own?’
91 Then he: ‘Be comforted. It’s right that I
fulﬁl, before I move, what I should do.
Justice demands this, and compassion binds.’
94 The One who sees no thing that’s new to Him
produced this form of discourse visible –
so new to us, so fresh since not found here.
97 While I, in all delight, still gazed upon
these images of great humility,
more precious being formed by that skilled hand.

100 ‘Look over here! Although their pace is slow,
there are,’ the poet murmured, ‘people there,
a crowd who’ll send us to the steps above.’
103 My eyes, entranced in wonder, longingly,
still seeking happily new things to see,
turned round towards him, making no delay.
106 Yet, reader, I’d not have your minds bewitched,
hearing how God would have the debt repaid,
or drawn away from your best purposes.
109 Don’t dwell upon the form their suﬀerings take.
Think of what follows, and that, come the worst, it can’t
go on beyond the Judgement Day.
112 ‘Sir,’ I began, ‘it seems that what I see,
moving towards us, are not human forms.
I cannot tell. I rave. I look in vain.’
115 ‘Their grievous mode of punishment’ (to me)
‘so creases them and bends them to the ground
that my eyes, too, ﬁrst fought at what they see.
118 Look, though, and ﬁx your gaze. Let sight untwist
the vines of what comes there beneath these stones.
You see already how each beats his breast.’
121 Proud Christians, wretched and – alas! – so tired,
who, feeble in your powers of mental sight,
place so much faith in your own backward tread,
124 do you not recognize that you are worms
born to become angelic butterﬂies
that ﬂy to justice with no veil between?
127 Why is it that your thoughts ﬂoat up so high?
You, with your faults, are little more than grubs,
chrysalides (no more!) that lack full form.
130 As sometimes, bracing up a roof or vault,
a ﬁgure will be seen as corbel stone
that, bending, joins its two knees to its chest, 133 at
which there’s born, in anyone who sees,
from this non-truth a truly harsh distress:
that’s how I saw them when I gave them thought.

136 The truth is each was hunched up, less and more,
according to his load, some more, some less.
The one who, from his actions, bore the most,
139 appeared in tears to pant: ‘I can’t do more.’

CANTO 11

1* ‘Our Father, dwelling in the heavenly spheres,
not circumscribed by these but through that love
which you bear more, on high, to primal things,
4 Your name, and all the prowess of your might,
be praised by every creature. It is ﬁt
to pay all thanks to Your sweet forming power.
7 May peace, as in Your realm, come down to us.
For we ourselves cannot attain to that,
if come it doesn’t – not with all our wit.
10 As all your angels make a sacriﬁce,
singing “Osanna” , of their wills to you,
so, too, may men make sacriﬁce of theirs.
13 Give us this day the manna each day needs.
Without that, exiled in this grinding waste,
all travel backwards who strive forwards most.
16 And just as we, to everyone, forgive
the harm we bear, grant generous pardon, too.
And do not look upon what we deserve.
19 The powers we have (so easily subdued)
do not make trial of through the ancient foe,
but free us from the one who is our goad.
22 This ﬁnal prayer is made, O dearest Lord,
not for ourselves (we now have no such need).
We speak for those behind us, who’ve remained.’
25 Then praying, for themselves and us, ‘God speed’,
these shadows made their way beneath such loads
as sometimes in our nightmares can be seen,

28 around and all around on that ﬁrst ledge,
worn-out, tormented (though each diﬀerently),
purging away the murky fogs of earth.
31 If they, in that place, always speak our good,
down here what can be said and done for them,
by those whose wills are good in where they root?
34 We surely ought to help them cleanse the marks
that they bore hence – till, light in weight and pure,
they’ve power to rise towards the wheeling stars.
37 ‘May justice and compassion soon relieve
this weight from you, so you may move your wings,
which then, as you desire, may lighten you!
40 So, too, point out to us, to left or right,
the shortest way to go towards the stair.
If more than one, teach us the least steep slope.
43 For this man here who comes along with me,
burdened in being clothed with Adam’s ﬂesh,
is loath to climb, despite the will to do.’
46 The words that came, responding now to those
that he whom I was following ﬁrst spoke,
rose from some source not clearly manifest.
49* But this was said: ‘Turn right, and come with us
along the bank. You’ll ﬁnd an upward path
where even living persons can ascend.
52 And were I not impeded by this stone
that tames the hauteur of my once-proud neck –
so I am bound to keep my head held low –
55 I’d raise my eyes to look at this man here –
alive still, though unnamed – in case I knew him,
and make him look in pity on my load.
58 I was Italian, bred of Tuscan stock.
Aldobrandesco was my noble sire.
I don’t know if his name was known to you.
61 The ancient lineage and courtly airs
of my great forebears wrought such pride in me
that, heedless of the mother we all share,

64 I so disdained all other men, I died
because of that. The Sienese know this,
as do the squads in Campagnatico.
67 I am Omberto, and my arrogance
did harm to me, but not to me alone,
for all my peers were victims of that bane.
70 Because of this, till God is satisﬁed,
I needs must bear this weight among the dead –
since I did not while still with those who live.’
73* Still listening, I had kept my face bowed low.
And one of them – not he who spoke these words –
twisted beneath the load that bore him down.
76 He saw and recognized, then called to me,
holding his eyes, with eﬀort, ﬁrmly ﬁxed
on me, bowed down, who went along with him.
79* ‘Oh! Aren’t you Oderisi?’ I replied.
‘Great Gubbio’s glory, glory of that art,
known to Parisians as design-in-light?’
82 ‘Dear man,’ he said, ‘those pages smile far more
that Franco Bolognese smoothly pens.
The honour is all his – and, partly, mine.
85 Yet while I lived, I’d not, you may be sure,
have shown such courtesy. My heart’s desire
was excellence. I yearned for that alone.
88 For arrogance like this one pays a fee.
And I’d still not be here if I had not,
while having power to sin, turned back to God.
91* Oh, what vainglorying in human powers!
How short a time the green lasts on the height
unless some cruder, darker age succeeds.
94* Once, as a painter, Cimabue thought
he took the prize. Now “Giotto”’s on all lips
and Cimabue’s fame is quite eclipsed.
97 In verse, as well, a second Guido steals
all glory from the ﬁrst. And someone’s born,
who’ll thrust, perhaps, both Guidos from the nest.

100 The roar of earthly fame is just a breath
of wind, blowing from here and then from there,
that changes name in changing origin.
103* What more renown will you have if you strip
your ﬂesh in age away than if you died
before you’d left oﬀ lisping “Din-dins!”, “Penth!”
106 when once a thousand years have passed, a space
that falls far short of all eternity –
an eye blink to the slowest turning sphere.
109* He who, ahead of me, takes such brief strides
is one with whom all Tuscany once rang.
His name’s now scarcely whispered in Siena,
112 where he was Lord when Florence, running wild –
as proud at that time as it’s whorelike now –
was left destroyed and ravaged by the war.
115 All your renown is coloured like the grass,
which comes then goes. And He discolours it
who made it ﬁrst appear from bitter earth.’
118 And I to him: ‘Your words in truth give heart
to good humility, and puncture pride.
But who’s this man of whom you spoke just now?’
121 ‘Provenzan Salvani’ (the answer was).
‘And he is here because he proudly claimed
to hold Siena wholly in his hands.
124 And since his death, he’s walked as now he walks,
without repose. Like all who down there dared,
he pays his debts in full with such-like cash.’
127 And I: ‘If any spirit who delays
repentance to life’s ﬁnal verge is bound
to dwell below the gate and not ascend
130 (unless good prayers on his behalf bring aid)
until it’s passed as much time as it lived,
how was it granted him that he should come?’
133 ‘When he could boast, in life, most glorious fame,
freely he took a stand,’ the answer was,
‘in Campo di Siena, free from shame,

136 and there, to save his friend the punishment –
incurred in his imprisonment to Charles –
he brought himself to tremble through each vein.
139 I’ll say no more (I know I speak dark words,
but little time will pass till those near you
will act in ways that mean you can explain).
142 Provenzan’s deed removed him from those bounds.’

CANTO 12

1 Paired up, like oxen yoked to move as one,
so onward with that burdened soul I went,
as long as he – my dear, kind sir – allowed.
4 But then he said: ‘Leave him and go beyond.
The best thing is that each here drives along
his craft, by oar or sail, as best he can.’
7 I made myself (as, walking, one must do)
in person stand up straight. And yet my thoughts
remained in me stripped bare, reduced, bowed low.
10 I’d now moved on, and followed willingly
the footsteps of my teacher. And we two
already showed in tread how light we were.
13 And then he said: ‘Just turn your eyes down there.
That will be good for you, to ease the way.
See there the bed on which your paces rest.’
16 Compare: to serve as some memorial
for those entombed beneath, our earthly graves
bear signs of what they had been when alive –
19 at which it often happens that we weep,
responding to the spur of memories
which only strike the heel of pious minds.
22 I now saw carvings there – though ﬁner, far,
considering the hand that crafted them –
along the path the mountain cliﬀs had left.
25* M ark now, to this side I here saw the one
nobler-created than all creatures else,
thrown down in ﬂashing thunder ﬁre from Heaven.

28 M ark this, I witnessed on the other side,
pierced by the spear celestial, Briareus,
heavy on earth, laid low in deathly chill.
31 M ark this, I saw Timbreus, still in arms,
and Mars and Pallas round their father’s side,
amazed to see the scattered Giantbones.
34 M ark this, I saw, beneath the tower he’d made,
Nimrod, as in confusion. All the tribe
of Shinar – arrogant as he – gazed on.
37 A h! Niobe I saw. With grieving eyes,
I traced your outline carved within that road,
among your children – seven, then seven – slain.
40 A h! Saul, it seemed that you were there, as dead,
pierced on Gilboa’s hill with your own sword,
feeling no longer showers of rain or dew.
43 A h! Mad Arachne, how I saw you there
half-turned to spider and the work in shreds
which, once attempted, brought you so much harm.
46 A h! Rehoboam, as you’re there portrayed,
you’re not, now, menacing, but full of dread.
A chariot bears you oﬀ, though none gives chase.
49 N ow also shown on that hard ﬂoor was how
Alcmaeon made the fatal ornament
that cost his treacherous mother very dear.
52 N ow was displayed how Sennacherib’s sons
ﬂung themselves at him in the temple hall,
and how, once dead, they left him there alone.
55 N ow there appeared the chaos, crude and cruel,
wrought by Thamyris, who to Cyrus said:
‘You thirst for blood. With blood I’ll feed you full!’
58 N ow, ﬂeeing, the Assyrians were shown –
routed when Holofernes met his death –
and showed the relics of his mortal pain.
61 M ark this, I saw Troy’s ash and hollowed stone.
A h, Ilion! How humbled and how vile,
n ow picked out in those signs, you seemed to be!

64 What master of the pencil or the brush
could reproduce those shadows and those strokes
which, there, would make the sharpest mind admire?
67 The dead seemed dead, the living seemed alive.
And all I trod upon – bowed low – I saw
far truer than had those who’d seen it true.
70 Strut on, you sons of Eve, with head held high.
Display your pride, and do not bend your face
to see the errors of your evil way!
73 We’d made more distance round the mountainside
(spending more time than mind, still bound, supposed, in
following the track the sun observes)
76 when he – who always kept his mind ahead –
began: ‘Now straighten up, and lift your brows.
The moment’s passed to go caught up like this.
79 See? Over there! An angel quickens pace.
It comes our way. Come! See! See, too, the hour, sixth
handmaid of the day, already turns.
82 Adorn your eyes and acts with reverence,
so he, to his delight, may speed our climb.
Think! This same day will never dawn again.’
85 I was well used to his admonishments –
always ‘to waste no time’. So, as to that,
the words he spoke could hardly be obscure.
88 To us that lovely creature now advanced,
white-vestitured, in countenance, it seems,
trembling in air as does the morning star.
91 Opening his arms, then opening his wings,
he said: ‘Now come. The steps are very near,
and now the climb could not be easier.
94 Men, though invited, come too rarely here.
O human nature! You are born to ﬂy!
Why fail and fall at, merely, puﬀs of wind?’
97 He led us where the cleft was in the rock.
And here he struck his wings across my brow,
then promised me the way ahead was safe.

100* Compare: to scale the hill towards that church
which dominates the city (so well-ruled!)
that stands around the Rubaconte bridge,
103 rightwards the vaunting angle of the climb
is broken by a stairway built in times
when chronicles and balances were true.
106 Like this, the bank which falls so steeply here
from where the next ring stands was gradual,
though all around the high rock shaved its sides.
109* While turning (we two persons) to that slope
voices sang out: ‘Beati pauperes’ ,
as no mere speech could properly relate.
112 How diﬀerent from the thoroughfares of Hell
are those through which we passed. For here with songs
we enter, there with ﬁerce lamentations.
115 We were, by now, ascending that great stair.
And I, it seemed, was lighter now by far
than I had seemed while still on level ground.
118 So, ‘Tell me, sir,’ I said, ‘what weight has now
been lifted from me, so I almost feel
no strain at all in walking on my way?’
121 He answered: ‘When the “P”s that mark your brow,
remaining still, though growing now more faint,
have all (as is the ﬁrst) been sheared away,
124 your steps will then be conquered by good will
and, being thus impelled towards the heights,
will feel no strain but only sheer delight.’
127 And then I did what anyone would do
with something on their head – they can’t tell what – but,
seeing people point, peer up suspiciously,
130 then raise a hand to help them be quite sure,
to search around, to ﬁnd and do the job
that sight had been unable to complete.
133 So now my right-hand ﬁngers found reduced
the letters there inscribed to merely six
of those the angel with the keys had cut.

136 My leader, watching as I did so, smiled.

CANTO 13

1 We now were at the summit of the stair.
The mountain there – which, as one climbs, takes ill away
– is chiselled back a second time.
4 And so there’s, here, a ledge around the slope,
which binds it, as the ﬁrst ledge also did,
except that now the arc curves faster in.
7 Shade? There’s none here, nor any sign to see.
The cliﬀs show bare. The path looks shorn of marks, save
only for its stones of liverish blue.
10 ‘I fear,’ the poet said, considering this,
‘our choice of route may well be long delayed
if we wait here for someone we can ask.’
13 Firmly, he ﬁxed his eyes towards the sun.
He made a fulcrum of his right-hand side,
and moved his left around that central point.
16 ‘You, sweetest light, in trusting you I now,’
he said, ‘embark upon this strange new road.
Guide us, as guidance must be here required.
19 You warm the world. You shine out over it.
Your rays, where counter reasons have no weight,
must always lead with their authority.’
22 The distance of a mile (as earth miles count)
we travelled now from where we’d been before –
our will so quick – in little time at all.
25 Then, unseen, ﬂying towards us now were heard
the voices of spirits, all delivering
a courteous welcome to the feast of love.

28* The ﬁrst voice, ﬂeeting past, declared aloud,
‘Vinum non habent!’ (‘Look, they have no wine!’),
and then went on behind us, echoing that.
31 And then, before it wholly was not heard,
so distancing, another voice went by,
declared, ‘I’m Orestes!’ and did not stay.
34 ‘Father,’ I said, ‘what voices can these be?’
And, as I asked, there came – just look! – a third, saying:
‘Love those by whom you suﬀer harm.’
37 ‘This conﬁne scourges,’ my good teacher said,
‘the sin of envious hate. And so the skeins
that form the stinging lash vibrate with love.
40 The bridle will elicit diﬀerent notes.
And these, I think, as far as I can tell,
you’ll hear before you reach the pardon-pass.
43 But ﬁx your eyes intently through the air.
You’ll see some people sitting there ahead,
each in their place along the mountain wall.’
46 My eyes far wider than before, I looked
and saw in front of us a group of shades,
their cloaks in hue no diﬀerent from the rock.
49 And when we were a little further on,
I heard them calling: ‘Mary, pray for us.’
‘Michael!’ they cried. ‘Saint Peter! All the saints!’
52 I can’t believe that anyone on earth
could be so hard that pity, at the sight
that I saw now, would not have pierced him through.
55 For when at last I’d come up close to them,
and saw for certain what these people did,
I spurted from my eyes the milk of grief.
58 A poor hair shirt appeared to blanket each.
Each let the other lean against his side,
and all were let to lean against the cliﬀ.
61 In that same way, the blind, for lack of things,
stand begging for their needs on Pardon Days,
the head of one bent low above the next,

64 to gain from others pity for their plight
not only through the sound of their sad words
but also through the sight, which ached no less.
67 And as the sun grants nothing to the blind,
so, to the shadows that I speak of now,
the light of heaven bestowed no generous ray.
70* For all their eyelids, pierced by iron wires,
were sewn up like an untamed sparrow hawk’s
when, restively, it won’t keep calm and still.
73 To me, it seemed an outrage to walk by
seeing those others who did not see me.
And so I turned to where wise counsels were.
76 He knew full well what, mute, I meant to say.
And so he did not wait to hear my words.
‘Speak out,’ he said, ‘but brieﬂy, to the point.’
79 Virgil beside me took the outer strip
(where, since there is no verge to garland it,
one might too easily have tumbled down)
82 while, on my other side, in constant prayer,
were shadows who, through dreadful sutures, squeezed a
press of tears to rinse and bathe their cheeks.
85 To these I turned. ‘You, who are conﬁdent,’
so I began, ‘to see the Light Supreme –
which your desires are set upon alone –
88 may grace soon clarify the scum that blurs
your consciences, and let the streams of mind descend –
with all of memory’s power – through you once more.
91 Tell me – I’d hold your answer very dear –
if any soul among you is Italian.
It may, if I hear that, go well for him.’
94 ‘We are, dear brother, now all citizens
of one true place. But you must mean:
“…who winged his pilgrim life through Italy”.’
97 This, in reply, I seemed to hear proceed
from somewhere just ahead of where I stood.
So further on I made my voice be heard.

100 Among the rest, I saw a shadow seem
to wait as though to say to me, ‘Well, how?’
tilting its chin up as the sightless do.
103 ‘Spirit,’ I said, ‘you train yourself to rise.
If you’re the one who just replied to me,
then make it known. Tell me your name and place.’
106* ‘I’ (so the answer came) ‘was Sienese,
and here repair the wicked life I led,
weeping so He will grant Himself to us.
109 Sapia (though not sapient) I was called.
And I, to witness other people’s harm,
felt joy far more than at my own good luck.
112 Listen. Don’t think that this is mere deceit.
Was I (then sinking down my arc of years)
as crazy as I’ve said I was, or not?
115 My fellow Sienese near Colle cliﬀ
were joined in battle with their enemies.
And God, I prayed, would do what He then did.
118 Routed here, shattered, they’d turned in bitter
footfalls of ﬂight. And, seeing them hunted,
sheer happiness seized me, beyond compare,
121* so great I turned my reckless face on high,
yelling at God: “I’ll fear you never more!” –
just like the blackbird in a sunny spell.
124 Then, coming to the utmost edge of life,
I sought my peace with God. And even now,
my dues would not, in penance, have been paid
127* had I not been remembered in the prayers
that Peter Pettinaio so devoutly made
in heartfelt charity on my behalf.
130 But who are you, to make your way round here
inquiring as to us – with, still, I’m sure,
your eyes unbound, and breathing when you speak?’
133 ‘My eyes,’ I said, ‘will only brieﬂy here
be taken from me. For the harm is small
that they, pursuing envy, might have done.

136 Far greater fear holds sway within my soul
of tortures suﬀered on the ridge below.
The burdens of that place already press.’
139 And she: ‘Who, then, has led you up to us,
when you are certain that you’ll head back down?’
‘This one,’ I said, ‘with me, who speaks no word.
142 I am alive. And so please ask of me,
you chosen spirit, if you’d have me move
my living tread on earth to serve your needs.’
145 ‘Well, that’s,’ she said, ‘a strange new thing to hear,
a great sign of the love God bears to you.
Do help me sometimes when you say your prayers.
148 I beg of you, by that for which you yearn,
if you should ever tread on Tuscan soil,
make my name good for those most near to me.
151* You’ll ﬁnd them with that empty-headed crowd
whose hopes are set on Talamone’s port.
They’ll lose more there than tracing Dian’s source.
154 The venturers, though, will come oﬀ much the worse.’

CANTO 14

1 ‘Who’s this one here who’s circling round our Hill
before Death’s given him the right to ﬂy,
opening his eyes and closing them at will?’
4 ‘I don’t know who, but know he’s not alone.
You ask, since you are closer up to him.
And treat him gently so he’ll speak to us.’
7* Two spirits – each one leaning on the next –
thus talked about me on the right-hand side,
then laid their heads back, to have words with me.
10 And one now said: ‘O you, that soul who goes,
still ﬁxed in mortal limb, towards the skies,
gives us, in charity, some ease and say
13 what place you’re from, and who it is you are.
You make us marvel at the grace you’ve gained –
as much as must be at things never known.’
16* And I: ‘Through Tuscany, a ranging stream
cuts down from Falterona where it’s born –
its course not sated for a hundred miles.
19 I bring this body from that river’s bank.
There’d be no point in saying who I am.
My name, as yet, produces no great sound.’
22 ‘If, in my thoughts, I swoop on what you mean,’
he then replied to me (the ﬁrst to speak),
‘you are, I take it, talking of the Arno.’
25 ‘But why,’ the other asked, ‘did he then hide
the name that designates that ﬂowing stream,
as people do with something that they dread?’

28 To which, in oﬀering a due reply,
that shade ﬁrst-questioned answered: ‘I don’t know.
It’s right, though, that that valley’s name should die.
31* For from its origin, where those sheer hills
(Pelorus was dissevered from that chain)
that breed more streams than many others do,
34 down to the estuary where yet once more
it pays back what the skies dry from the sea
(rivers derive their onward spate from that)
37 virtue is ﬂed by all – an enemy!
a hateful snake! – either because that place
is fated so, or pierced by wickedness.
40* The people dwelling in that wretched vale
are changed in nature to the point at which
it seems that Circe might provide their swill.
43 Through brute swine, ﬁrstly, who far more deserve
acorns for food than any human dish,
it points the channel of its meagre path.
46 Then, coming down, it lights on mongrel dogs
snarling far worse than ever they can bite.
From these it turns its snout in high disdain.
49 So ever downwards – and the more it swells
so much the more does this accursed ditch
hit upon bitches now transformed to wolves.
52 Then, having sunk through many a stagnant lake,
it ﬁnds out foxes that, so full of guile,
fear not at all that they might be out-tricked.
55 Nor shall I cease to speak since this one hears.
It will be good for him if he attends
to what true spirit here unknots for me.
58* I see your little nephew now become
a hunter of those wolf packs on the bank
of that ﬁerce stream, and he confounds them all.
61 He sells their ﬂesh while this is still alive,
then slays them like mere cattle past their prime.
Many of life, himself of praise he robs.

64 He comes out bloodied from that dismal wood,
and leaves it so, a thousand years from now,
it won’t rebranch and reach its primal state.’
67 As at announcements of some grievous harm,
whatever side the fangs of peril strike,
the faces of those listening will grow grim,
70 so did I see that other soul, who’d turned,
setting his mind to hear, cloud and grow sad,
in garnering up these words to his own heart.
73 The speech of one and how the other looked
made me the keener to be told their names,
and so, with prayers as well, I made request.
76 At which the spirit who ﬁrst spoke to me
began once more: ‘You’d have me bring myself
to do for you what you’ll not do for me.
79 But since God wills that such great grace should shine
through all your being, I’ll not grudge you this.
Know, then, that I was Guido del Duca.
82 My blood so ﬁred itself with envious thoughts
that, if I saw some man transformed by joy,
you’d then have seen me ﬂushed to liver green.
85 From such a sowing I now reap the straw.
You human creatures, why repose your hearts
where you are banned from mutual exchange?
88 This is Rinieri of the Calboli –
the honour of that House, their pride. No one
lays claim, as heir, to all his proven worth.
91 Nor has his blood alone – between the Po,
the hill, the sea and Reno – turned to waste,
stripped of the good that truth and pleasure need.
94 For all within these conﬁnes now is full
of poisonous thickets, so it’s now too late
for cultivation to reduce their grip.
97* Where is good Lizio, Arrigo Mainardi?
Pier Traversaro and Guido di Carpigna?
Oh, Romagnuoli, you’re all bastards now.

100 When in Bologna is a Fabbro bred?
When in Faience a Bernadin di Fosco
(branching so nobly from mere creeping weeds)?
103 Don’t marvel, Tuscan, if you see me weep
when I call back to mind, with Guido Prata,
Ugolin d’Azzo (who once lived with us),
106 Frederick Tignoso and his circle, too,
the Traversara house, the Anastagians,
(these last two having no descendants now),
109 the knights and ladies, all the toil and ease
that love and courtesy once made us seek,
where now all hearts are criminal and base.
112* O Bretinoro, why not take to heel,
since your whole family has gone its way,
as others do, eluding vice and ignominy.
115 Bagnacaval, it’s good you don’t re-child,
and bad for Castrocaro – far worse Conio! –
so tangled up in childing worthless lords.
118 The clan Pagani, once their demon’s gone,
will do quite well, but not so well that pure
account of them will ever now remain.
121 O Ugolino of the Fantolines,
your name is safe since none, demeaning you,
is now expected who could dim your fame.
124 But, Tuscan, you had better pass along.
To weep delights me more than words now can.
This talk has wrung my mind with such distress.’
127 We knew those well-loved souls could hear our tread.
Therefore, their silence, as we went our way,
gave us the conﬁdence to take that path.
130 So, going on, when once we were alone,
just like a thunder bolt that rends the air,
a voice rang out towards us, saying this:
133* ‘They’ll murder me whoever captures me!’
then ﬂed like thunder when it fades away,
the clouds abruptly being torn apart.

136 Then, as our hearing gained some peace from that –
just see! – a second with as great a crash
seemed then at once to follow that ﬁrst peal.
139 ‘I am Aglauros, who became a stone!’
And then, to get up closer to the poet,
I stepped not forwards but towards the right.
142 The air was quiet now on every side
and, ‘That was the restraint’ (so Virgil said)
‘that ought to keep mankind within due bounds.
145 You take the bait, though. So the well-barbed hook
of our old enemy will draw you in.
And that’s why checks and lures have little power.
148 The heavens wheel around and summon you,
displaying to your eyes eternal charms.
Yet your gaze ﬁxes merely on the ground.
151 For that, He strikes you down who sees all clear.’

CANTO 15

1* As much time as the childlike circle plays
between the third hour at its ultimate
and when the day had ﬁrst begun to rise,
4 remained, it seemed – till evening – for the sun
to travel and complete its onward way.
There it was vespers (midnight in our clime).
7 The sun’s rays struck us straight along the nose.
For now the mountain had, by us, been turned
so that we went direct towards the west.
10 But then I felt my forehead weighted down
by splendour far more bright than ﬁrst there’d been.
It dazed me, wondering at these untold things.
13 And so, towards the peak of my two brows
I raised my hands and shaped myself a shield
to pare these too great visibles away.
16* Compare: from water or reﬂective glass
a ray of light leaps back as opposite,
rising exactly in the same degree
19 (as tests and theory demonstrate) against
a plumb-stone line as when it ﬁrst descends,
equal as measured from that vertical.
22 It seemed that I was struck by some such light
that broke, reﬂected back, ahead of me,
causing my eyes, in ﬂight, to speed away.
25 ‘My gentle father, what is this?’ I said.
‘I can’t protect my eyes from it enough.
It moves, it seems, towards us all the time.’

28 ‘Don’t marvel,’ he replied to me, ‘if still
the family of the heavens yet bedazzle you.
This comes as messenger, to bid us climb.
31 And soon to see such things as these will bring
not stupor, but delight to you as great
as you by nature are disposed to feel.’
34 And when we’d come to where the angel was,
the blessed creature said in tones of joy:
‘Enter this stair – less steep than those before.’
37* And climbing now (the angel left below)
behind us, ‘Beati misericordes!’
and ‘Rejoice! You conqueror!’ were sung.
40 Together, my teacher and I alone
proceeded upward and, while going on,
I thought I’d gain some proﬁt from his words,
43 so turned to him, demanding he should say:
‘What did that spirit of Romagna mean
to speak of “mutual exchange” and “bans”?’
46 ‘He knows the damage done by his main ﬂaw.
Don’t therefore be surprised,’ he said, ‘if he
chides us, to lessen penitential tears.
49 Because your human longings point to where
portions grow smaller in shared fellowship,
meanness of mind must make the bellows sigh.
52 If love, though, seeking for the utmost sphere,
should ever wrench your longings to the skies,
such fears would have no place within your breast.
55 For, there, the more that we can speak of “ours”,
the more each one possesses of the good
and, in that cloister, caritas burns brighter.’
58 ‘I hunger more for satisfaction now
than if,’ I said, ‘you’d not said anything.
I gather in my mind still greater doubt.
61 How can it be that good distributed
to many owners makes, in that respect,
each one far richer than if few had shared?’

64 ‘You thrust your mind,’ he answered, ‘back down there
and, thinking still in terms of earthly things,
you tease out darkness from the light of truth.
67 The Good that – inﬁnite beyond all words –
is there above will run to love like rays
of light that come to anything that shines.
70 It gives itself proportioned to the ﬁre,
so that, as far as caritas extends,
eternal Worth increases over it.
73 The more there are who ﬁx their minds up there,
the more good love there is – and more to love –
and each (as might a mirror) gives to each.
76 And if these words of mine don’t slake your thirst,
you’ll see Beatrice. And she, in all, in full,
will ease this craving – as she’ll others, too.
79 Press forward, then. For these ﬁve wounds that heal,
through all the pain they bring, will soon
be gone, as are by now the other two.’
82 Intending here to say: ‘You’ve fed me well’,
I saw that I had reached the upper ring.
And there my eyes, entranced, now silenced me.
85* For, in a sudden-seeing ecstasy,
I was, it seemed, caught up and made to see
a temple, many thronging all around.
88 There at the door a lady stood who said –
sweet in her manner as a mother is:
‘Why, dearest son, have you done this to us?
91 Look at how, grieving, your father and I
have searched for you!’ And she falling silent,
what ﬁrst appeared now disappeared from view.
94 A second woman now appeared to me.
Her cheeks were washed with streams that grief distils
when grief is born in us from angry scorn.
97 ‘If you,’ she said, ‘are lord of that great place
whose name caused so much strife among the gods,
and yet from which all knowledge sparkles out,

100 take vengeance on those hands, Pisistratus,
that clasped our daughter in their rash embrace.’
That lord, to me, seemed mild and generous
103 and – temperate in expression – answered her:
‘What shall we do to those that wish us ill
if those that love us are condemned by us?’
106 I saw, next, crowds enﬂamed in ﬁres of wrath,
all yelling out to all a loud ‘Kill! Kill!’,
stoning a young man to the point of death.
109 And he, I saw, bowed down towards the earth
as death imposed on him its heavy weight,
yet still he bore his eyes towards the skies
112 (his look that look which opens pity’s lock)
praying in so much strife that Heaven’s Lord
should pardon those who’d hunted him to death.
115 When once my soul turned outwards once again
to beings truly there outside itself,
I’d strayed, I saw, towards not-false error.
118 My leader, who could see that I behaved
like someone who has just escaped from sleep,
exclaimed: ‘What’s wrong?Why can’t you stand straight
up?
121 You’ve come along for half a mile or more
veiling your eyes, your legs turned all askew,
like someone in the grip of sleep or drink.’
124 ‘My dearest father, if you’ll hear me out,
I’ll tell you what appeared to me,’ I said,
‘during the time my legs were snatched from me.’
127 ‘Had you a thousand masks around your face,
your thinking,’ he replied, ‘would not, to me,
be hidden, even in the least degree.
130 You’ve seen these things. So you’ll have no excuse
if you don’t give your heart to streams of peace
which spread out from their everlasting source.
133 I did not ask, “What’s wrong?” as those might do
who only see with eyes that do not see,

staring at bodies that are drained of life,
136 but rather asked to give your stride more strength.
You need to prod the indolent like this,
slow as they are to use their waking powers.’
139 Walking towards the setting sun, we stretched
to see as far beyond as eyes could reach
against the brilliance of the evening rays.
142 Then, bit by bit, a rising cloud of smoke,
as dark as night, began to form ahead.
There was no way for us to turn aside.
145 It took from us our eyesight and pure air.

CANTO 16

1 Darkness in Hell, or any night stripped bare
of planets under impoverished skies
(a pall of clouds as dense as these could be),
4 has never formed, for me, as thick a veil
as did the smoke that now surrounded us,
or stretched a weave so rasping in its feel
7 that eyes could not stay open to its touch.
Therefore, my guide, as ever wise and true,
came to my side, his shoulder lending aid.
10 And, as a blind man goes behind his guide –
for fear he’ll wander or collide with things
that might well maim him or, perhaps, could kill – 13 I,
too, went on through acrid, ﬁlthy air,
attending to my leader, who would say,
‘Take care. Don’t get cut oﬀ!’ repeatedly.
16 I now heard voices. And it seemed that each
was praying to the Lamb of God, who takes
all sin away, for mercy and for peace.
19* The words they uttered ﬁrst were ‘Agnus Dei’ –
the self-same text and tune from all of them,
so that, it seemed, at heart they sang as one.
22* ‘Are these all spirits, sir, that I can hear?’
I spoke. He answered: ‘Yes. In that you’re right.
And anger is the knot they’re working free.’
25* ‘And who are you, that cleave our smoke-ﬁlled air,
and speaks of us as though (if this could be)
you still divided time by month and year?’

28 These words were those that one voice uttered now.
At which my teacher said to me: ‘Reply.
Ask them if we can make our climb from here.’
31 And I: ‘My fellow creature, who now wash
to go once more in beauty to your maker,
you, if you follow close, will hear of wonders.’
34 ‘I’ll follow you as far as I’m allowed.
And if,’ he said, ‘the smoke won’t let us see,
hearing instead will keep us closely joined.’
37 ‘Still swaddled in the clothes that death dissolves’
(so I began) ‘I make my way above,
and come here from the agonies of Hell.
40 And if God circles me with such great grace
that I, as He desires, should see His court,
in ways beyond what men of our day know,
43 then do not hide who you were till your death,
but speak and tell me: am I near the rise?
And your words only will become our guide.’
46 ‘I was a Lombard, and my name was Mark.
I knew the world and loved that noble worth
at which all now aim slack and unslung bows.
49 To make your climb, just take the straight way on.’
He answered thus, and added then: ‘I pray
that you should pray for me, when you’re up there.’
52 And I to him: ‘Through faith I bind myself
to do what you demand. And yet I burst,
if you will not explain, with one great doubt.
55 Though simple to begin with, what you say
has made doubt double now. That makes me sure
I’m right to couple things heard here and elsewhere.
58 The world is, truly, as your words declare,
a sterile place where every virtue fails –
pregnant with viciousness that blankets all.
61 Point me, I beg you, to the reason why,
so I can see and then show others, too.
Some place the cause in stars, some here below.’

64 A long, deep sigh that grief dragged out to ‘Uhi’
he uttered ﬁrst, then ‘Brother,’ he began,
‘the world is blind, and, yes, that’s where you’re from.
67 You, living there, derive the cause of all
straight from the stars alone, as if, alone,
these made all move in mere necessity.
70 Yet were that so, in you would be destroyed
the freedom of your will – and justice fail
in giving good its joy and grief its ill.
73* The stars initiate your vital moves.
I don’t say all. And yet suppose I did,
you’re given light to know what’s good and bad,
76 and free will, too, which if it can endure
beyond its early battles with the stars,
and if it’s nourished well, will conquer all.
79 Of better nature and of greater power
you are free subjects. And you have a mind
that planets cannot rule or stars concern.
82 So if the present world has gone astray,
the reason lies in you, in you it’s sought,
and I, on your behalf, will spy it out.
85 Leaving the hand of him who holds it dear
(before it truly is ), it weeps and laughs,
that little simple soul, and baby-plays,
88 as young girls do, and does not know a thing –
save only, as moved by a joyous Maker,
it willingly turns to every playful thrill.
91 It tastes the ﬂavour, ﬁrst, of some small good,
and, fooled by this, it chases down its track,
unless a brake or guide bends such love back.
94 So law is needed to apply this brake.
A king is needed, with the skill to see
the towers of that true city, at the least.
97* The laws are there. Who sets his hand to these?
There’s no one. For the shepherd out ahead,
though he can chew the cud, has not split hooves.

100 So people, when they see their leader snatch
at those same goods that greedily they crave,
graze on just those, and do not seek beyond.
103 So – as you may well see – bad government
is why the world is so malignant now.
It’s not that nature is corrupt in you.
106* Once, Rome, which made this world for us pure good,
had two suns in its sky. And these made known
both roads to take, the world’s and that of God.
109 One sun has snuﬀed the other out. The sword
is joined now to the shepherd’s crook. And ill
is bound to follow when force links these two.
112 For, once they’re joined, there can’t be mutual dread.
And if you don’t believe this, think of crops,
where grass is known according to its seed.
115* Before the Emperor Frederick was opposed,
in regions washed by Po and Adige
all courtesy and prowess could be found.
118 Now anyone is safe to travel through
who might avoid, from sheer embarrassment,
speech or encounters with good, honest men.
121 There are, it’s true, three old ones there in whom
times now long gone rebuke the new. To them,
in granting better life, God seems too slow.
124* Currado da Palazzo, good Gherardo
and Guido da Castello, better named
the “honest Lombard” – as French travellers do.
127 So you can say this now: the Church of Rome,
by mingling in itself two forms of rule,
falls in the mud, befouling self and load.’
130* ‘Dear Mark,’ I said, ‘your argument runs well.
And now I see why Levi’s priestly sons
were all excluded from inheritance.
133 But who’s that “Gerard” whom you say remains
as pattern of an age that is no more,
to speak reproaches to our savage time?’

136 ‘Your words are meant to test,’ so he replied,
‘or else to have me on. You’re speaking Tuscan,
yet have no clue, it seems, about good Gerard!
139 I know no other name by which he’s known –
unless I draw it from his daughter’s shame.
May God go with you. I can’t come along.
142 You see that bright gleam, dawning through the smoke,
already whitening. I must now go back –
the angel’s there – before I’m shown to him.’
145 He turned, and would not hear me any more.

CANTO 17

1 Reader, recall, if ever in the hills
a fog has caught you so you couldn’t see
(or only as a mole does through its skin),
4 then how, as vapours, clinging, damp and dense,
begin to dissipate, the sun’s round disc
enters, and feebly makes its way through these.
7 From this, you’ll easily be brought to see,
in your imagination, how I saw
the sun again, already setting now.
10 So, levelling with my teacher’s trusted steps,
I came out from that cloud, along with him,
to rays, down on the shore, already dead.
13* Imagination, you at times will steal
the outer world from us so we can’t tell
(even if horns in thousands blare around)
16 who makes you move when sense does not provide.
It’s light that moves you, formed in heavenly spheres by
Will, which guides it down, or else per se.
19* The godless wrath of one who changed her form
to be that bird which most delights in song
appeared, and left its footprint on my brain.
22 My mind was now so clenched upon itself
that nothing was received within its bounds
that might have come from outside or beyond.
25 And then, within these high imaginings,
one cruciﬁed rained down. He, in his gaze,
was ﬁerce and full of scorn and, like that, died.

28 Around him were the great Ahasuerus,
Esther (his wife) and honest Mordecai,
who showed such probity in word and deed.
31 This image of itself now burst – as might
some rising bubble when the water fails,
beneath the surface where it ﬁrst ﬁlled out.
34 And then, within my vision, there rose up
a girl who, weeping ﬁercely, said: ‘Great Queen!
Why wish yourself as nothing in your wrath?
37 To keep – not lose – Lavinia, you slew yourself.
You’ve lost me now, dear mother. This is me.
I mourn yours more than any other’s doom.’
40 As sleep is shattered when some strange new light
strikes, on the sudden, at our closed-up eye,
then ﬂickers for a moment till it dies,
43 so, too, these images I saw crashed down,
as, now, a light struck hard against my face,
greater by far than those to which we’re used.
46 I turned around to see where I might be.
At which, a voice spoke out: ‘You go up here.’
This distanced me from any other thought,
49 and wrought in me that great desire to see
‘Who was it that said this to me?’ which won’t
admit of rest until we’re face to face.
52 But, as when sun weighs heavy on our sight
and veils its shape in overwhelming glare,
so did my inner powers at this fall short.
55 ‘This spirit is divine. Before we’ve asked,
it indicates the way to go above,
and hides itself within the light it gives.
58 It treats us as we like to treat ourselves.
For those who see a need yet wait for prayers
ill-willingly stand ready to refuse.
61 To this great welcome let us tune our pace
and strive to climb before the darkness falls –
we cannot, otherwise, till day returns.’

64 So said my leader and, along with him,
I turned my step to make towards a stair.
As soon, though, as I reached its lowest tread,
67* I felt close by a movement as of wings,
a fanning at my face and words: ‘Beati
paciﬁci – of violent wrath they’re free.’
70 By now the ﬁnal rays, pursued by night,
had risen over us, and gone so far
that stars in many parts appeared to view.
73 ‘My strengths and powers! Why do you slip away?’
(I said within myself.) ‘A truce, I feel,
has been imposed upon my striding thighs.’
76 We’d got to where the stairway rose no more.
And there we stuck – as ﬁxedly as ships
that beach themselves, arriving at the shore.
79 I waited for a while, in case I heard
some sign in this new ring of anything,
then, turning to my teacher, I said now:
82 ‘My dearest teacher, tell me what oﬀence
is purged within the circle where we are.
Our feet stand still. Don’t let your words do so.’
85 ‘The love of good,’ he said, ‘when this falls short
of what it ought to be, is here restored.
The oar that wrongly slackened strikes once more.
88 But, so you may more plainly understand,
turn, pay attention and, from this short wait,
you’ll carry oﬀ some truly worthwhile fruit.
91* Neither creator nor created thing
was ever, dearest son, without’ (he starts)
‘the love of mind or nature. You know that.
94 The natural love can never go astray.
The other, though, may err when wrongly aimed,
or else through too much vigour or the lack.
97 Where mind-love sets itself on primal good
and keeps, in secondaries, a due control,
it cannot be the cause of false delight.

100 But when it wrongly twists towards the ill,
or runs towards the good too fast or slow,
what’s made then works against its maker’s plan.
103 Hence, of necessity, you’ll understand
that love must be the seed of all good powers,
as, too, of penalties your deeds deserve.
106 Now, since love cannot turn its face away
from that which greets it with a promised health, all things
are safe from hatred of themselves,
109 and since no being can be understood
as independent, separate, from the First,
eﬀects, decidedly, can’t hate their source.
112 Restat : if I’ve prepared the ground aright,
the ill we love must be our neighbour’s harm.
Such “love” is born in three ways from your slime.
115 Some hope, by keeping all their neighbours down,
that they’ll excel. They yearn for that alone –
to see them brought from high to low estate.
118 Then, some will fear that, if another mounts,
they’ll lose all honour, fame and grace and power, so,
grieving at success, love what it’s not.
121 And some, it seems, when hurt, bear such a grudge
that they crave only to exact revenge –
which means they seek to speed another’s harm.
124 This tri-formed love is wept for down below.
But now I’d have you understand the next
which runs, in broken order, after good.
127 We all, confusedly, conceive a good,
desiring that our hearts may rest in that.
And each will strive to make their way to it.
130 If love is slack in drawing you to view –
or win – that good, then this ledge, where we’re now, after
your ﬁt repentance, martyrs you.
133 And other goods will not bring happiness,
not happy in themselves, nor that good source
of being, seed and ﬂower of all that’s good.

136 The love that gives itself too much to these
is wept for in the circles still above.
But why “tripartite” I shall not here say,
139 so you can seek the reason for yourself.’

CANTO 18

1 That great authority concluded here.
Attentively, he looked me in the face,
to see if I was pleased and satisﬁed.
4 And I (a new thirst searching through my brain)
was silent outwardly but said within:
‘Too many questions may, perhaps, annoy him.’
7 He, though, true father that he was, had seen
this hesitant desire unopened yet,
and, speaking, gave me courage to speak out.
10 ‘My power to see,’ I said, ‘in your light, sir,
grows bright, alive in me, so – yes – I’m clear
on every point your words deﬁne and stress.
13 And so, my dear, kind father, I entreat
that you expound for me that love to which
you trace all good acts and their opposite.’
16 ‘Direct on me,’ he said, ‘your mind’s sharp light.
And I shall make quite evident to you
the error of the blind – who claim they lead.
19* The mind, which is created quick to love,
when roused by pleasure into conscious act
will tend towards such things as give delight.
22 From things that truly are, your apprehensio
draws out an image which it then unfolds
within you, so that mind turns round to it.
25 If mind, once having turned, inclines to that,
this bending is called love – and “nature”, too –
bound up in you afresh by pleasure’s knot.

28 And then, as ﬁre moves upwards to the heights
(by virtue of its form, it’s born to rise
to where it may, as matter, most endure),
31 so minds, when captured, pass into desire –
a motion of the spirit that won’t pause
until the thing it loves has yielded joy.
34 From which, it’s clear, you’ll ﬁnd how far truth hides
from those who think it true that all love is –
in all its types – deserving of our praise,
37 perhaps because its matter, seemingly,
is always good. Yet, grant the wax is good,
the seal need not be so in every print.’
40 ‘Your words (and, walking in their track, my wits)
disclose to me what love is,’ I replied.
‘Yet this, for me, gives birth to greater doubt.
43 If love is just an oﬀering from outside ,
and souls go forward on no other foot,
then going right or wrong involves no merit.’
46 ‘I can, as far as reason sees, respond.
Beyond that, faith’s required’ (so he to me)
‘and you must therefore wait for Beatrice.
49 Forms of substantiality (distinct
from matter, though at one with that) collect,
each one within itself, speciﬁc powers.
52 These powers, unless they act, are not perceived,
nor are they known except by their eﬀects –
as life appears in plants when leaves are green.
55 No one can, therefore, see from where there comes
the sense of primal concepts that we have,
nor our desire for prime desirables.
58* These are in you as is the urge in bees
to make their honey. And this primal will
cannot be credited with blame or praise.
61 To group all other wills around the ﬁrst,
there is a counselling power innate in you
that’s meant to guard the threshold of consent.

64 This is the principle from which derives
the inward rationale of just desert
that stores or winnows good love from what’s bad.
67 And those who argued all things to the core
took notice of this inborn liberty,
and so bequeathed to us a moral rule.
70 Suppose that love, then, of necessity
does rise in you, when once its ﬁre begins,
you have within the power to rein it back.
73 This power, which Beatrice understands,
is freedom of the will. And so take care
that, if she speaks of it, it’s in your mind.’
76 The moon at almost midnight, slow to rise
(formed like a copper bucket burnished red),
now made the stars seem fewer in the sky,
79* and ran against the heavens around those roads
where sunlight ﬂames when anyone in Rome
observes it set between the Sards and Corsicans.
82* That noble shade, for whom Pietola
is named above all other Mantuan towns,
had now laid down the burden I’d imposed.
85 So, having harvested his plain, frank words –
which answered all the questions I had had –
I stood like someone in a drowsy blank.
88 But all such drowsiness was borne away
by people who had suddenly appeared,
swinging towards us from behind our backs.
91* As once the Asop and Ismenus saw,
whenever Thebans needed Bacchus’s aid,
orgies at night, feet pounding by their banks,
94 so here – from what I saw as these came on –
they, too, ran scything round the mountain’s curve,
spurred on and ridden by good love and will.
97 Soon they were on us. For they moved at speed,
racing towards us, that great multitude.
And two ahead were shouting, weepingly.

100* ‘Maria hastened up to Juda’s hill!’
And, ‘Caesar, bringing Lerida to heel,
struck at Marseilles and then ran into Spain.’
103 ‘Quick! Quick! Let’s lose no time through lack of love!’
so all of those behind now shouted out.
‘For zeal in doing good turns grace new green.’
106 ‘You people, whose keen fervour now repays
some negligence or else delay of yours,
through tepidness in acting for the good,
109 this man (he’s living, and I tell no lie)
desires, when sunlight shines on us again,
to go on up. So where’s the closest gap?’
112* These were the words my leader spoke to them.
And one among these spirits now replied:
‘Come! Follow us and you’ll soon ﬁnd that hole.
115 Full of desire to move ourselves along,
we cannot pause. And therefore, pardon us,
if what for us is right, seems crass and wrong.
118 When Barbarossa ruled – that good, true lord
of whom Milan still speaks with pain and grief –
I, at Verona, was San Zeno’s Dom.
121 And there’s a man with one foot in the grave
who’ll bitterly bewail that abbey soon,
and grieve the power that he had over it.
124 For he, where one true shepherd should have been,
has placed his son, diseased throughout his frame, and
worse than sick in mind, a bastard born.’
127 He’d run so far beyond us by this time,
I don’t know if his words went on or ceased.
This much I heeded and would gladly keep.
130 And he who helps me in my every need
said now: ‘Turn round, and look at these two here, who,
fast approaching, put the bite on sloth.’
133* Behind the rest, these two were calling: ‘First,
before the river Jordan saw their heirs,
all those for whom the sea had opened, died!’

136 And: ‘Those who couldn’t bear until the end
the labours that Anchises’ son endured,
submitted to a life where honour lacked.’
139 Then, when these shades had split so far from us
that neither any more could be observed,
a new thought set itself within my mind,
142 from which were born yet other, diﬀering thoughts.
And so I wandered round from this to that
and, dozing oﬀ, I gladly closed my eyes,
145 transforming all my thinking into dream.

CANTO 19

1 Now, at that hour when daytime heat cannot –
vanquished by earth and, sometimes, Saturn’s rays –
sustain its warmth against the chilling moon,
4* when geomancers in the east trace out,
before the dawn their signs of Greater Fortune
(the path these climb is only brieﬂy dark),
7* there came, dreaming, to me a stammering crone,
cross-eyed and crooked on her crippled feet,
her hands mere stumps, and drained and pale in look.
10 I gazed at her. Then, as to frozen limbs
when night has weighed them down, the sun gives
strength, likewise my staring made her free, longtongued,
13 to speak, and drew her, in the briefest space,
erect in every limb, giving the hue
that love desires to her blurred, pallid face.
16 And once her powers of speech were thus untied,
she then began to sing, so I could not,
except with pain, have drawn my eyes away.
19 ‘I am,’ she sang, ‘I am the lovely siren.
So full of pleasure to the ear my tune
that mariners I magic in mid-ocean.
22 And Ulysses, entranced to hear my chant,
I turned oﬀ course. Rarely do those who’ve learned my
ways depart. I bring them full content.’
25 And then, before that mouth closed up once more,
a lady – holy and alert – appeared

and, at my side, she crushed the other’s power.
28 ‘Virgil! O Virgil!’ – in the harshest tones –
‘Who’s that?’ she said. And he approached, eyes set,
unwavering, on her true nobility.
31 He seized the Siren, ripping down her dress,
opened the front of her, displayed her guts,
and that, with all its stench, now woke me up.
34 I swung my eyes around. ‘Three times, at least,
I’ve voiced this. Come!’ (My trusted teacher spoke.) ‘Get
up! Let’s ﬁnd an opening you can take.’
37 Up I now got. And all the circles round
the holy hill were full of highest day.
We went along, the new sun at our backs.
40 Now following in his track, I bore my brow
as people do when – loaded down with thought –
they make themselves the half-arch of a bridge.
43 And then I heard: ‘Come on! The crossing’s here!’
spoken in tones more soft and generous
than ever could be heard in mortal shires.
46 With open wings, as, seemingly, a swan’s,
the one who’d spoken turned us to the heights
between two walls within the granite rock.
49* He moved his feathers and he fanned us both,
aﬃrming that ‘qui lugent’ are the blessed.
To them the gift of consolation comes.
52 ‘What’s got to you? You still stare at the ground.’
When once beyond the angel, climbing on,
these were the words with which my guide began.
55 ‘I’m made to make my way in so much doubt
by that weird vision – which so wraps me up
I just can’t leave oﬀ thinking back to it.’
58 ‘You saw,’ he said to me, ‘the ancient witch.
For her the penitents above us weep.
You saw how men are loosened from her grip.
61 Let that suﬃce. So strike your heels to earth
and turn your eyes to see the lure that’s spun

in mighty wheels by one eternal king.’
64 A falcon, ﬁrst, looks down towards its feet,
then, being called, will turn and stretch full length, drawn
by desire to reach the oﬀered food.
67 And so did I. Through one split span of rock,
which served as entrance to the upward path,
I went to where the ring above begins.
70 Now loosed out on to circle number ﬁve,
I saw there people all around who wept,
each turned face downwards, lying on the earth.
73* ‘Adhaesit pavimento anima mea!’
I heard them saying this, but sighing deep
so what they said was hardly understood.
76 ‘You chosen ones of God whose suﬀerings are,
by hope and justice, made less hard to bear,
direct me to the steep way we must climb.’
79 ‘If you come here exempt from lying ﬂat,
and wish to ﬁnd the quickest way ahead,
your right hands will be always to the out.’
82 This was the poet’s prayer, and thus – a bit
ahead of us – the answer came. And I,
on hearing this, knew where the rest were hid.
85 I turned my eyes to meet my lord’s own eyes.
And he assented with a happy sign
to what my face displayed as its desire.
88 So, being free to act as I saw ﬁt,
I drew myself across and stood above
that being whose words had made ﬁrst me note,
91 saying: ‘You spirit who, in tears, matures
that without which no soul can turn to God,
for my sake, leave awhile your greater care.
94 Who were you? Tell me that, and why you’ve turned
your backs above – and what you’d have me beg
on your behalf, returning whence I moved.’
97* ‘Why Heaven should turn our rears against itself
you’ll shortly know,’ he said to me. ‘But ﬁrst

scias quod ego fui successor Petri.
100 Between Siestri and Chiavari
a lovely stream descends, and from its name
my blood derives the height of all its claims.
103 A month, no more than that, I knew the weight
of keeping papal garments from the mud.
Compared with that, all loads are feather light.
106 My own conversion was, alas, too late.
And yet, made shepherd of the Roman ﬂock,
the lies of life revealed themselves to me.
109 I saw the heart will never rest in these.
And I could not rise higher in that life.
So love of this life then caught ﬁre in me.
112 I was, until that point, a wretched soul.
Divorced from God, my all was avarice.
And I am punished, as you see, for that.
115 What avarice will do is now made clear
through penance in these souls, inverted so.
The mountain has no pain more harsh than this.
118 Because our eyes were ﬁxed on earthly things,
at no point raised to look towards the heights,
so justice sinks them here within the earth.
121 Since avarice extinguished all our love
for any good – and so good works were lost –
justice here holds us tight within its grip.
124 We’re captives, bound at both our hands and feet,
and here stretched out, unmoving, we shall stay,
as long as our just Lord may think it right.’
127 I’d fallen to my knees and meant to speak.
But he, as soon as I’d begun, took note –
simply on hearing my respectful bow.
130 ‘What makes you twist like that?’ he said to me,
and I to him: ‘Aware of your high rank,
my conscience bit me when I stood erect.’
133 ‘Straighten your knee, my brother. Just get up!
Make no mistake. I am – along with you

and all – co-servant of one single Power.
136* If ever you have heard aright the sound
of Holy Gospel in ‘neque nubent’
then you can see why I should argue thus.
139 Now go away. I’d not delay you more.
You, standing there, upset the tears I shed,
by which I ripen penance as you said.
142* I have, down there, a niece. Her name’s Alagia,
good in herself – provided that our house
does not, by bad example, make her worse.
145 And she alone is left of me back there.’

CANTO 20

1 Against a better will, will can’t well ﬁght.
And so, against what pleased me, pleasing him ,
I drew the sponge still thirsty from the stream.
4 I moved myself. My leader moved through those
free spaces that, around the cliﬀ, remained – tightly, as by
some castle’s battlements –
7 since all those people, melting drop by drop,
in tears, the ill that holds the world in thrall, encroached
too far upon the outer part.
10* Curses on you, you wolf bitch, ages old!
You snatch more prey than all the other beasts, endlessly
hollow in your hungering.
13 You heavens, whose revolutions, we believe,
alter the way things are with us down here,
when will He come to put this wolf to ﬂight?
16 We went our way with slow, restricted tread,
I listening to the shadows whom I heard
weeping in piteously sharp distress,
19* and chanced to hear ahead of us the cry,
‘Sweet Mary!’ uttered in those ﬂoods of tears that women
scream when labouring at a birth.
22 The voice went on: ‘What poverty you knew
we all can see from that poor lodging house
in which you laid your holy burden down.’
25 Then, following this: ‘O good Fabrizio,
you chose the way of honest penury
above the treasures that were stained with vice.’

28 To me, these words had such a pleasing sound
that I pressed forward to be clear about
the spirit who, it seemed, had spoken them.
31 He still was speaking of the generous gifts
that Nicholas once made to those young girls,
to save the honour of their threatened youth.
34 ‘O soul! Your words shed light on so much good.
Tell me,’ I said, ‘who were you – and why you
alone renew these words of worthy praise.
37 If I return to ﬁnish that short road
of life on earth which ﬂies towards its end,
your answer won’t remain without reward.’
40* ‘I’ll say,’ he answered, ‘(though support from there
I don’t expect) because in you yourself,
before your death, so great a grace shines forth.
43 I was the root from which that sick weed grows
that overshadows every Christian land,
so that it’s rare to strip good fruit from it.
46 If Douai, though, or Ghent or Bruges or Lille
could get their way, then vengeance would be swift.
I pray for it from Him who judges all.
49 I was, down there, called Hugh Capet once.
From me were born those Louis and Philippes
by whom in these new days our France is ruled.
52 I was from Paris, and a butcher’s son.
And when the line of ancient kings died out –
all gone, save one who wears a monk’s dark cowl – 55 I
found my hands were tight around the reins
that govern in that realm, and so empowered
in making that new gain, with friends so full, 58 that, to
the widowed crown my son’s own head
received advancement. And from him began
our lineage of consecrated bones.
61 Until that splendid dowry of Provence
deprived my blood of any sense of shame,
they didn’t do much good – nor much great harm.

64 There, there began, with violence and with lies,
their course of plunderings. And to put things right,
Ponthieu they seized, then Norman lands, then Gascon.
67 Then Charles reached Italy. To put things right,
he sacriﬁced young Conradin, then sent
Saint Thomas to the skies, to put things right.
70 I see a time, not very far from now,
that brings another Carlo out of France
to make his clan and him the better known.
73 Unarmed he comes. And simply with that lance
that Judas jousted with, he aims then stabs
the guts of Florence till the belly bursts.
76 From this, his proﬁt will be no mere land,
but sin and shame – the heavier for him
the more he counts as light the harm he does.
79* The other – captured, once, on board his ship –
I now see sells his daughter, bargaining
as pirates do in deals for female slaves.
82 O avarice! What more harm can you do?
You’ve got my blood so ﬁrmly in your grip,
it takes no thought about its own kin’s ﬂesh.
85* To make its past and future crimes seem less,
I see the ﬂeur-de-lys besiege Anagni,
and Christ recaptured in his vicar’s form.
88 I see them mocking him a second time.
I see renewed the vinegar and gall.
I see him slain again with living thieves.
91 I see renewed a Pilate who’s so cruel,
unsatisﬁed, he bears with no just cause
his greedy saints towards the Temple walls.
94 My Lord and God! When shall I see in joy
that just revenge that, hidden to our view,
makes anger in your secret counsels sweet?
97 Those words I spoke about the one true Bride
of God’s Own Spirit – those that made you turn, seeking
from me some further commentary – 100 respond, while

daylight lasts, to all our prayers.
But as the darkness of the night sets in
we then sound out the contrary tune.
103* We now call back to mind Pygmalion,
whose hankering after gold made his will turn
to treachery and theft and parricide.
106 Then, too, the misery of miser Midas,
caused by that gluttonous demand of his,
for which he’ll always be ridiculous.
109 Then each recalls mad Achan’s escapade,
and how he stole the spoils of Jericho –
so Joshua’s anger seems to gnaw him still.
112 We blame Sapphira, and her husband, too,
and praise the hooves that trampled Heliodore.
And round the mount, in notoriety,
115 goes Polymnestor who slew Polydore.
Then ﬁnally our cry of “Crassus!” comes.
“You know. So tell us! What’s the taste of gold?”
118 These words are spoken high or sometimes low,
responding to the urge that makes us move,
spurred to a greater or a lesser pace.
121 In telling – as, by day, we do – the best,
I was not, earlier, the only one.
But no one else nearby had raised their voice.’
124 We’d gone from him by now and, moving on,
struggled, as far as we were given strength,
to overcome the hardships of that road,
127 when, as though things were crashing down, I heard
the mountain tremble. And I felt the chill
that all will suﬀer when they come to die.
130* Delos itself did not so ﬁercely shake
before Latona made a nest of it
to bring to birth the two eyes of the sky.
133 On every side there then began this cry
(my teacher turned around to me to say,

‘While I’m your guide, you need not be afraid’): 136*
‘Gloria in excelsis Deo!’ and all
were speaking out these words, so I could tell the
meaning of the cry from those close to.
139 We stood unmoving, caught there in suspense –
as were the shepherds who ﬁrst heard this song – until the
tremor ceased and all was done.
142 And then once more we took our holy path,
looking at those that lay there on the earth
who’d gone back, now, to their familiar tears.
145 Never has ignorance with so much force
(if, in my memory, I do not err)
driven me in my keen desire to know,
148 as now it seemed to, thinking and thinking.
Nor had I dared, in all our haste, to ask.
Nor, for my part, could I see anything.
151 So, timid, deep in thought, I travelled on.

CANTO 21

1* The natural thirst that never can be slaked
save by those waters that, as gracious gift,
the widowed, bright Samaritan demanded once,
4 toiled in me now, while hurry spurred my steps,
behind my leader, round the cluttered path,
mourning within to see that just revenge.
7* And look! As in his gospel Luke describes
how Christ, when risen from the hollow tomb,
appeared to two who travelled on their way –
10 a shadow from behind us now appeared.
Still looking at the crowd around our feet,
we didn’t notice till it spoke and said:
13 ‘May God, my brothers, bring to you His peace.’
We turned round suddenly. And Virgil made
a ﬁtting gesture to reply to this.
16 Then he began: ‘May that true government
which keeps me bound in exile endlessly
grant you a place within that happy court.’
19 ‘What’s that?’ he said, as we still hurried on.
‘If you are shades that God won’t let ascend,
who, then, has led you up this stair so far?’
22 ‘If you observe,’ my teacher said, ‘those signs
he’s bearing and the angel traces out,
you’ll see it’s right that he reigns with the good.
25* But since the fate that spins thread day and night
has not, in his case, yet drawn out the skein
that Clotho casts and spins for every life,

28 his soul – a sister to both yours and mine –
though coming here cannot come on its own.
Its eyes as yet don’t see as our eyes do.
31 And I was therefore drawn from Hell’s wide throat
to show him – and I’ve still to show him more – as much as
my own schooling will allow.
34 But if you’re able, tell me why the mount
shuddered just now so hard, and why it seemed
to cry, down to its plashy foot, as one.’
37 In asking this, he pierced the needle’s eye
of all I longed to know. And so my thirst,
through hope alone, became less keen in me.
40 ‘There’s nothing that this mountain’s holy law
consents to,’ so the other now began,
‘that’s lacking order or irregular.
43 This place is free from every kind of change.
Only what Heaven, of itself, receives
can act here as a cause, and nothing else.
46 Therefore no showers of rain, nor hail or snow,
no dew or hoar frost ever falls above
that little stairway with its three brief steps.
49* No clouds here – whether rare or dense – appear,
no glint of lightning nor the rainbow child
of Thaumas, there so often changing place.
52 And dry evaporations do not rise
beyond the third and highest of those steps –
I spoke of them – where Peter’s vicar stands.
55 Tremors occur below (some small, perhaps;
some great). At these heights, though, no tremor comes
from winds that hide (I can’t tell why) in earth.
58 Tremors strike here when any soul feels pure
and rises, newly cleansed, to start its climb.
And that cry follows as the soul ascends.
61 The will alone gives proof of purity
when, wholly free to change its sacred place,
it aids and sweeps the soul up, willing well.

64 The soul till then indeed had willed ascent.
But, set against that will there is the bent –
which God instils – for pain as sin’s equivalent.
67 And I, who’ve lain ﬁve hundred years and more
in that same pain, have only felt just now
the freedom of the better way ahead.
70 That’s why you felt and heard those tremors here,
and spirits round the mountain rendering praise, so God,
our Lord, might send them higher soon.’
73 He said these things to us. And since we take
a joy in drinking equal to our thirst,
I could not say what beneﬁt he’d brought.
76 My lord, in wisdom: ‘Now I see the net
that here entangles you – and your escape:
why are there tremors here, why all rejoice?
79 Now tell me, at your pleasure, so I’ll know,
who were you? And your words, please, will include why
you have lain so many centuries here.’
82* ‘In those days when good Titus, by the aid
of our exalted King, avenged the wounds
from which the blood that Judas sold had sprung, 85 I
was,’ the spirit answered, ‘well renowned.
My name down there was that which most endures, and
honours most – not yet, though, of the Faith.
88 My voice in spirit breathed so sweet that Rome
took me to her own heart from French Toulouse,
where merit dressed my brow with myrtle leaves.
91 My name was Statius to the people there.
I sang of Thebes and then of great Achilles,
but stumbled carrying that second load.
94 The seed my ardour sprang from was a spark
which warmed me through of that most sacred ﬂame from
which a thousand, and yet more, are lit.
97 I’m speaking of the Aeneid – a mum
to me, to me my nurse in poetry.
Without that, I’d not weigh a single gram.

100 And could I live back then when Virgil lived,
I would agree to pass, beyond the due
that brought me out of exile, one year’s sun.’
103 These words turned Virgil round to me – his look
saying, unspeakingly: ‘Be silent now!’
But will power can’t do everything it wills.
106 For tears and laughter follow on so close
to those emotions from which each act springs
that these least follow will in those most true.
109 And so I smiled, as though to give a hint.
At which the shade fell silent and just stared, straight in
my eyes where what we feel shows most.
112 ‘I wish that all your toil may come to good
Why did your features, though, display to me
just now,’ he said, ‘that sudden ﬂashing smile?’
115 So I was caught on this side and on that.
One urges silence while the other calls
for words from me. I sigh. I’m understood
118 by him, my teacher. ‘Do not fear to speak.
Speak out,’ he said to me, ‘and tell him all
that he so urgently desires to know.’
121 At which, ‘You ancient spirit,’ I began,
you’re wondering maybe why you see me smile.
I’d have you gripped with yet more wonderment.
124 The one who guides my eyes towards the heights
is that same Virgil that you drew upon
to sing so strong of deities and men.
127 If you suppose I’d other cause to smile,
put that aside. It is not true. And think
those words you spoke of him were cause enough.’
130 He’d bowed at once to clasp my teacher’s feet.
But he, in that embrace, said: ‘Brother, don’t!
You are a shadow and you see a shade.’
133 And he, in rising: ‘Now you grasp how great
the love that warms my heart for you must be,
when I dismiss from mind our emptiness,

136 treating a shadow as a thing of weight.’

CANTO 22

1 The angel had by now been left behind –
that angel who had turned us to Gyre Six,
once having shaved my brow of one more wound.
4* Those souls who thirst for justice he had named
as ‘blessed’. His words as far as ‘sitiunt’ –
but not beyond that verse – had ﬁlled this out.
7 And, ﬂowing lighter than through other bays,
I went along and, free from any toil,
followed those rapid spirits on their way.
10 Virgil, meanwhile, began to speak: ‘Pure love,
provided that its ﬂame shows outwardly,
kindled in virtue, kindles answering love.
13* So, from the time that Juvenal came down
to dwell among us on the fringe of Hell,
and made your feeling for me plain to see,
16 my own good will to you has gripped me more
than any for a person yet unseen.
These stairs will seem, then, short for me to climb.
19 But tell me – and, in friendship, pardon this,
if too much conﬁdence sets free my reins –
and speak with me as friendship now permits:
22 how could it be that in your breast, so full
of all the wisdom that your learning won,
a place was found for avarice as well?’
25 Statius, on hearing this, was moved to smile
(a little, anyway), but then replied:
‘As marks of love, I value all your words.

28 It’s true, though, that the way things often look
provides false substance for our searching doubts, the real
considerations lying hid.
31 Your question veriﬁes that you believe –
viewing, perhaps, the circle where I was –
that I was “grasping” in the other life.
34 Please understand that avarice, for me,
ran too far oﬀ. My own extreme – the opposite –
was punished over many thousand moons.
37 Had I not set my spending urge to rights,
and seen the meaning of the line you shout
in, almost, agony at human ways:
40* “You, awestruck hungering for gold! Why not
impose a rule on mortal appetite?”
I’d feel the rumbling turns of that grim duel.
43 With that, I realized our hands can wing
too openly in wild expense, and so
for that repented, as for all my sins.
46 How many will rise up with hair cropped short
through ignorance of vice, which takes away
repentance while we live, or at life’s end.
49 Know, too, the guilt that butts at any sin,
directly counter to that ﬁrst oﬀence,
is drained here, with it, of its rampant green.
52 And so, if I have been (to purge my sins)
among those men who weep for avarice,
this came my way by rule of contraries.’
55* ‘When ﬁrst you sang of vicious wars between
the twofold sadness that Jocasta bore,’
so said the singer of the farming songs,
58 ‘to read the notes that Clio strikes from you,
it does not seem that you had then become
faithful in faith – without which good must fail.
61* If that is so, what sun or candlelight
dispelled your shadows so that you could set
your sails to track the ﬁsherman aright?’

64* ‘You,’ he replied, ‘ﬁrst beckoned me to drink
from springs that rise in high Parnassian glades.
And you ﬁrst lit the way for me to God.
67 You acted then like someone who, at night,
bears at his back a lamp – no use to him,
but teaching those the way who come behind
70 when once you said: “The years begin anew,
justice returns, so, too, Man’s earliest time.
A new race, born of Heaven, now descends.”
73 I was, through you, a poet and was Christian, too.
But, so you’ll better see what I intend,
I’ll stretch my hand to colour in this sketch.
76 The world, by then, was pregnant, all entire,
with true belief – an understanding sown
by messengers of God’s eternal realm.
79 And your words (which were touched on just above)
sang, with new preachers, to a single tune.
I therefore took to visiting these men.
82* And these soon came to seem to me such saints
that, when Domitian’s persecution struck
their weeping did not lack for my own tears.
85 And while on earth I lived my given time,
I aided them. And their right-thinking ways
made me look down on other cults in scorn.
88* Even before, in verse, I’d led the Greeks
to drink the Theban stream, I’d been baptized,
but still, from fear, concealed my Christian faith, 91*
displaying all that time a pagan face.
And this luke-warmness made me circle round
more than four hundred years on Terrace Four.
94 But tell me – you who lifted up the veil
that hid from me the good of which I speak –
while still some way remains for us to climb,
97* where, if you know, is ancient Terence now?
Plautus, Cecilius and Varro, too?
Tell me if these are damned, and where they walk.’

100 ‘All these, and Persius,’ my leader said,
‘myself and more are there beside that Greek
who, more than all, the Muses fed with milk,
103 within Ring One of that unseeing gaol.
And many times we speak of that great peak
which always keeps our nurses on its slopes.
106 Euripides is with us, Antiphon,
Simonides and Agathon, and Greeks
who crowned their brows with laurels, many more.
109* And seen there, too (all named within your verse),
Deiphile, Antigone and Argia,
Ismene also, grieving as she did.
112 She, too, is seen who spied out Langia’s stream.
The daughter of Tiresias is there,
Thetis and, with her sisters, Deidamia.’
115 The poets both fell silent and, anew,
free from the climb and tight surrounds of wall,
gave all their thoughts to looking round about.
118* Already, of the handmaids of the sun
four were behind. The ﬁfth was at the pole,
stretching its burning point towards the height.
121 My leader now: ‘I think that we should turn
our right sides to the far extremity,
and circle round the mount, as we are wont.’
124 So habit was the ﬂag we followed there.
We took the chosen path with lesser doubt
since that most worthy soul gave his assent.
127 They made their way, I all alone behind.
And as we went, I listened to their talk –
which made me see what writing verse can mean.
130* But then (a sudden break to soothing words!)
we found there, in the middle of the road,
a tree – its fruits, in perfume, good and sweet.
133 As ﬁr trees rise and lessen, by degrees,
from branch to branch, so this – but lessening down ,
lest anyone, I’d say, should try to climb.

136 And, to the side, where rock walls closed our path,
clear liquids streaming oﬀ the towering cliﬀ
sprinkled across the surface of the leaves.
139 Both poets now drew nearer to that tree,
and then, within its leaves, a voice cried out:
‘Of this dear food you’ll know the bitter dearth.’
142* And then it said: ‘Maria thought far more
of how the wedding might be full and ﬁne
than of that mouth by which she prays for you.
145 And Roman women were, in ancient times,
content to drink plain water. Daniel, too,
despising food, gained greatly in true thought.
148 The primal age – as lovely, once, as gold –
made acorns, through long fasting, good to taste, and,
thirsting, nectar of each rivulet.
151 Honey and locust were the nourishment
that fed the Baptist in the wilderness.
How glorious and great he is, for that
154 is made quite clear in the Evangelist.’

CANTO 23

1 While I, through these green boughs, ﬁxed searching sight
(as might some hunter tracking little birds,
who spends his life in vain on that pursuit),
4 my more-than-father spoke. ‘Dear son,’ he said,
‘do come along. The time appointed us
should be more usefully divided out.’
7 I turned my eyes (my footsteps came as fast)
to track that learned pair, who, talking on,
made going with them free, for me, of cost.
10* And then, just look! Both tears and songs were heard –
‘Labia mea, Domine’ , so tuned
it brought both happiness and pain to birth.
13 ‘My sweetest father, what is this I hear?’
so I began. And he: ‘These may be shades,
who go unknotting what their debts have tied.’
16 As pilgrims do when, deep in thought, they meet
a group along their path that they don’t know
and, though they turn towards it, still don’t stop, 19 so,
now, behind us, moving with more speed,
a throng of spirits, silent and devout,
reaching and overtaking us, gazed back.
22 Each one was dark and hollow round the eyes,
pallid in feature, and so gaunt and waste
their skin was formed to show the very bone.
25* Erysichthon, as I can well believe,
was not so dry and shrivelled round his rind
when, hungering, his dread was at its height.

28 And I, in thought, was saying to myself,
‘Just look! The folk who lost Jerusalem
when starving Mary pecked her son to death.
31* The sockets of their eyes seemed gemless rings,
and those who read Man’s ‘OMO’ in Man’s face
would clearly have seen ‘M’ in all of these.
34 Who would have thought the scent of some mere fruit
could work to make a craving grow like this,
and water, too – unless he knew the ‘how’.
37 Already wondering what starved them so,
I saw no reason that could well explain
such thinness and those dreadful scales of skin.
40* Then, look! A shadow turned its eyes on me,
deep in its skull, and, peering ﬁxedly,
cried out aloud: ‘For me, how great a grace!’
43 I never would have known him from his face.
But in his voice, all now was shown to me
that had, in feature, been destroyed and lost.
46 That spark for me rekindled at a stroke
clear recognition of those much-changed lips,
and once again I saw Forese’s face.
49 ‘Don’t boggle so to see these dried-up scabs,
which drain the colour from my skin,’ he begged,
‘nor that I have so great a lack of ﬂesh.
52 But speak and tell the truth about yourself,
and who these two souls are that act as guides.
Don’t stand there, holding back the spark of words.’
55 ‘That face of yours I wept for once in death
now gives me,’ I replied, ‘as painfully,
a cause to weep, seeing it here so wrenched awry.
58 But tell me, in God’s name, what strips your leaves?
Don’t make me, wonderstruck, attempt to talk.
No one, desiring other things, speaks well.’
61 ‘There falls,’ he said, ‘from the Eternal Mind
a virtue in that water and that tree –
back there – which sharpens me and pares me down.

64 And all these people, weeping as they sing,
because their gullets led them past all norms,
are here remade as holy, thirsting, hungering.
67 Cravings to eat and drink are ﬁred in us
by perfumes from that fruit and from the spray
that spreads in fans above the greenery.
70 Nor once alone, in circling round this space,
is agony and pain refreshed in us.
I call it pain. Rightly, I should say solace.
73* For that same yearning leads us to the tree
that led Christ, in his joy, to say “Elì” ,
when through his open veins he made us free.’
76 And I to him: ‘Forese, from that day
that you exchanged your world for better life,
no more than ﬁve years have, till now, gone by.
79 If your capacity to sin was dead
before there came to you that holy hour
of penance that remarries souls to God,
82 how can it be that you’ve got here so quick?
I thought that I should ﬁnd you there below,
where restitution comes to time through time.’
85 ‘To drink sweet wormwood in this rightful pain
I’m brought,’ he now replied, ‘so rapidly
by broken tears that my dear Nella shed.
88 With her devoted prayers and heartfelt sighs,
she’s drawn me from that shore where spirits wait,
and freed me from the other circles, too.
91* My little widow, whom I loved so well,
to God is dearer still, and better loved,
since she so stands alone in doing good.
94 For, as to womenfolk, Barbagian Sards
are far more chaste and modest in their ways
than is that Barbary I left her in.
97 What, dearest brother, would you have me say?
A future time, already in my sight,
will come (when our time’s still not history),

100 when, from the pulpit, there’ll be issued bans
forbidding bare-faced Florence girls to go
with blatant breasts and both their boobs on show.
103 What mere barbarians or Saracens
required a priest or threat of on-spot ﬁnes
to make them cover up when they go out!
106 If, though, these brazen creatures only guessed
what Heaven so swiftly will bring down on them,
then they’d already howl with open mouths.
109 For if, foreseeing this, I’m not beguiled,
they’ll come to grief before the cheek grows hair
on any boy now rocked by lullabies.
112 So, brother, don’t still hide yourself from me.
You see? It’s all of us, not me alone,
who gaze in wonder where you veil the sun.’
115 ‘If you bring back to mind,’ I now replied,
‘what you were once to me and I to you,
the memory of that will still be sore.
118* I, from that life, was turned away by him
who walks ahead of me the other day,
when she, his sister’ (here I point the sun)
121 ‘showed full and round. He, through the utmost depths
of night and all the truly dead has been
a guide to me, who follow in true ﬂesh.
124 Now his encouragements have drawn me up,
ascending here and circling all round
this mount that straightens what the world distorts.
127 He will, he says, be in my company
until I’m there where Beatrice is.
And when I am, I must then be without him.
130 Virgil it is who tells me all of this.’
(I point him out.) ‘That other is the shade
for whom just now, in loosing him, your realm
133 was shaken in its every slope and cliﬀ.’

CANTO 24

1 Our words did not slow down our steps (nor stride
end speech). So on we went, talking apace,
like ships when driven by a favouring wind.
4 And all those shades, who looked like things twice dead,
wondered – the sockets of their eyes dug out –
as they looked on, to see me there alive.
7 And I, continuing my former theme:
‘Statius’s soul climbs slower than it would,
perhaps by reason of another’s need.
10* But tell me: where’s Piccarda – if you know?
And tell me, too, among those souls who gaze
at me, are any that I ought to note?’
13 ‘My sister (was she more – I do not know –
in beauty than in goodness?) triumphs now,
crowned on Olympian heights, in happiness.’
16 This ﬁrst, and then he said: ‘Since we’re milked dry,
by fasting, of the way that once we seemed,
it’s not forbidden that we each be named.
19* And this’ (he pointed out) ‘is Bonagiunta,
Bonagiunta of Lucca. And, further on,
that face more raddled than are all the rest
22* held tight our Holy Church in his embrace.
He came from Tours, and purges, by this fast,
Bolsena eels and ﬂagons of vernaccia.’
25 Then, one by one, he named me many more.
And these, it seemed, were happy to be named.
I got no dark looks from them when they were.

28 I saw there, plying teeth on empty air,
Ubaldin da la Pila and that Boniface
who pastured many with his castled crook.
31 I saw Sir Marquis, who had far more space
to drink at Forlì (being far less parched),
a man who never felt he’d had his ﬁll.
34 But, as our glance will scan around then prize
one above all, so I with that Lucchese –
seeming the keenest to be known by me.
37* And he, I heard, was murmuring – I don’t know…
something: ‘Gentucca’? – where he felt the wound
of justice as it plucked and nibbled him.
40 ‘You seem, dear soul, to long to speak with me.
So make me understand your sense,’ I said,
‘and, speaking, satisfy the two of us.’
43 ‘A woman’s born (not yet grown-up in dress)’
(so he began) ‘who’ll make my native place
a joy for you, although men talk it down.
46 You’ll leave here carrying this prophecy.
And if my murmurings made you mistake,
then true events will make their meaning clear.
49 But tell me: do I see the man who drew
those new rhymes forth, whose opening line ran so:
“Ladies, who have intelligence of love…”?’
52 And I to him: ‘I am just one who, when
Love breathes in me, takes note and then goes on
showing the meaning that’s ordained within.’
55* ‘Dear brother, nah I see,’ he said, ‘the knot
that kept the Brief, Guittone, me as well,
from reaching to that sweet new style I hear of.
58* I see how close behind the power that speaks
your winged pens ﬂy, transcribing what he says –
which certainly our own pens never did.
61 Strive as you might to see, between our styles,
some greater diﬀerence, you’ll not see it here.’
And then, as though content, he said no more.

64* As birds that pass their winters by the Nile
will rise at times and gather on the air,
then ﬂy, more rapidly, to form a line,
67 so now the crowd of people who were there
all turned their faces and increased their stride,
light-footed, driven by desire (and thin!).
70 And then, like someone tired of trotting on
who lets the pack go by and takes his time
until the heaving of his chest is done,
73 Forese, too, now left the holy ﬂock.
As these raced oﬀ, he followed in my track,
saying: ‘So when shall I see you again?’
76 ‘How long I’ll live,’ I answered, ‘I don’t know.
But my return will not be sooner than
desire already brings me to this shore.
79 For that place where it falls to me to live
grows, day by day, less meaty as to good,
and sets its mind on ruin and despair.’
82 ‘That’s right,’ he said. ‘I see who’s most to blame
dragged at a horse’s tail towards the ditch
where no one, ever, can be free of sin.
85 That beast rampages faster with each step,
accelerating always, till it strikes
and leaves his broken corpse a mangled mess.
88 Those wheels’ (he ﬁxed his eyes upon the stars)
‘have little left to run till you see clear
the things that I, in words, cannot declare.
91 You stay behind. For time is precious here.
Coming along with you and keeping step,
I, in this realm, already lose too much.’
94 Knights gallop out at times from charging troops,
intending, as they leave the rest behind,
to claim the honours of an opening duel.
97 So oﬀ he went from us at greater pace,
and I remained, still travelling with those two
who in the world were such great dignitaries.

100 And when he’d gone so far ahead of us
that eyesight strained to follow in his track
(as did my mind to understand his words),
103 there then appeared to me, ripe-branched and bright,
a second fruit tree, not so far from us,
just there, around the bend that we’d now turned.
106 Beneath, I saw a group that raised their hands
and called towards the leaves I-don’t-know-what,
like silly, over-eager little tots,
109 who plead – although their target won’t respond
but rather seeks to whet their appetite,
dangling, unhidden, what they want aloft.
112 Then oﬀ they went (as though they’d changed their
minds).
And we ourselves arrived at that great tree
which turned aside so many tears and prayers.
115 ‘Move further on, and don’t get drawn to that.
There’s, higher up, the tree that Eve once bit.
This tree is raised from it, and ﬂourishes.’
118 Someone – I don’t know who – among its sprigs
spoke this. So Virgil, Statius and myself
closed ranks, to pass by on the rising side.
121* ‘Recall those curséd ones,’ the voice went on,
‘the centaurs, formed from cloud, who once, when gorged,
fought against Theseus with doubled chests.
124 Recall those Hebrews, softened so by drink
that Gideon would not take them in his ranks
when he swept down on Midian from the hills.’
127 So, tightly pressed against the near-side verge,
we passed along and heard how sins of greed
were followed once by miserable rewards.
130 Then, broadening out, we found an empty road.
A thousand paces bore us on (and more),
each of us silent, each contemplative.
133 ‘And what are you three thinking as you go?’
A sudden voice said this – at which I shied

in terror like an untamed animal.
136 I raised my head to see who this might be.
And in no furnace was there ever seen
metal or glass that glowed as bright and red
139 as now I saw one, saying: ‘If you wish
to get up there, then here’s where you must turn.
All seeking peace are bound to take this path.’
142 The blazing face had robbed me of my sight.
And so behind my teachers I went on
as someone will when led by what he hears.
145 And as the breeze in May – ﬁrst messenger
of whitening dawn – is moved in fragrant waves,
pregnant with grasses, greenery and ﬂowers,
148 so here I sensed, mid-brow, wind touching me,
and sensed the moving feathers of a wing
that brought ambrosial senses to the air,
151 and made me sense the words: ‘The truly blessed
are lit with so much grace that in their hearts
a love of food fumes forth no false desire,
154 esurient always for the good and true.’

CANTO 25

1* The hour would not allow a crippled climb.
The sun had now abandoned to the Bull
its noon-time ring, and night to Scorpio.
4 And so, like people who will not stay put
but, driven forward by some piercing need,
go on, whatever comes before their eyes,
7 so here we entered on a passageway
(so narrow it uncouples those who climb),
clambering in single ﬁle to mount the stair.
10* Compare: a ﬂedgling stork will lift its wings.
It wants to ﬂy but still dares not attempt
to leave the nest, so sinks back down again.
13 That was me, too – the urge to ask, alight
and yet snuﬀed out, arriving at the look
(no more) of someone who intends to speak.
16 My dearest father, though the pace was quick,
did not hold back, but said: ‘Let loose your bow.
You’ve drawn that arrow to its iron tip.’
19 Now, conﬁdent, I opened up my lips.
‘Where there’s no need for nourishment,’ I said, ‘how can
it be that people get so thin?’
22* ‘Were you to call to mind how Meleager –
a log consumed by ﬁre – consumed himself,
then this,’ he said, ‘would not seem sour to you.
25 And if you thought how, when you writhe around,
your image in a mirror also writhes,
what seems so hard would seem a hoary truth.

28 To make you, though, at ease in your desires,
Statius is here, look. I now call on him,
begging he be the healer of your wounds.’
31 Statius responded: ‘If, for him, I free –
with you still here – a vista of eternity,
let this be my excuse: I can’t say no.’
34* He then began: ‘My son, if in your mind
you gather up and guard my words to you,
they’ll be a light that shows the “how” you seek.
37 Pure, perfect blood – which never will be drunk
by thirsting veins – remains behind untouched,
as might some dish that’s carried from the feast, 40 and
gains there, in the heart, a power to mould
the limbs and organs of new embryos –
as blood runs through our veins to form our own.
43 This blood, distilled as sperm, descends to where
(more decent not to say) its droplets run
within the natural cup to other blood.
46 These two bloods meet and gather, each with each.
Menstrum is passive. But the other acts –
the perfect place it’s pressed from causes that – 49 and,
once arrived, begins to do its work,
ﬁrst to coagulate, and then to bring
the matter that it ﬁrst made dense to life.
52 The active virtue, which is now a soul,
much like a plant (though diﬀering in this point, that plant
souls stay as plants while this moves on), 55 continues
in its work, to move and feel,
as do aquatic sponges, then begins
to form the organs for the powers it seeds.
58 And now, my dearest son, the power that ﬂows
out of the father’s heart (where nature plans
for every organ) stretching, spreads to all.
61 This creature will become a speaking child.
Yet how , you don’t yet see. And this same point
led someone far more wise than you astray,

64 who in his teachings set the soul apart
from intellectus as possibilis ,
ﬁnding no organ taken up by that.
67 Open your heart. Receive the coming truth.
Know this: when once the foetal brain is brought to full
articulation in the womb,
70 the Primal Cause of Motion turns in joy
to see so much of Nature’s art, and breathes
new breath of spirit ﬁlled with power within,
73 which draws all active elements it ﬁnds
into its being and thus forms one soul
which lives and feels and turns as conscious self.
76 And – so you’ll wonder less at what I say –
look at how solar warmth transforms to wine
when joined with juices ﬂowing from the grape.
79* And when Lachesis cannot spin more thread,
the soul leaves ﬂesh and carries, by its power, both
human and divine along with it.
82 But memory, intelligence and will,
since all the other powers are silent now,
become, in act, much keener than before.
85 Unrestingly, it falls, by its own will –
a miracle! – on one of these two shores,
and here ﬁrst knows the paths it has to take.
88 As soon as it is circumscribed by place,
the power that forms it radiates around
in size and shape as in its living limbs.
91 And as the air, when drenched with vaporous rain,
is soon adorned with many diﬀerent hues,
from other rays reﬂected in the haze,
94 so when the soul has reached this point of rest,
the air around it gathers in the form
that virtual powers of soul impress on it.
97 And, as some little ﬂame pursues the ﬁre
and follows where its changing heat may lead,
so this new form will go where spirit goes.

100 And since in this way soul appears to view,
that’s called soul’s shade. And from this there will form
the organs of all sense, including sight.
103 And that is how we speak and how we laugh,
and how we form our tears and all those sighs
that you may well have heard around this hill.
106 As our desires and other feelings form,
the shade accordingly conﬁgures them.
And that’s the cause of what you wonder at.’
109 Our path had brought us, turning to the right,
to reach the ﬁnal twist of punishment,
and we were now intent on new concerns.
112 The bank here shot out blazing bolts of ﬂame.
And round the edge there breathed an upward wind that
bent these ﬂames back, keeping them at bay.
115 So, one by one, we had to make our way
along the unprotected outer rim.
I feared the ﬁre there. Here I feared the fall.
118 Meanwhile, my leader said: ‘In such a place
we need to keep a strict check on our eyes.
It wouldn’t be too hard for them to stray.’
121* And then I heard: ‘Summae Deus clementiae’
singing within the heart of that great blaze,
which made me – no less watchfully – turn round.
124 I saw there spirits walking in the ﬂames.
At which I looked at both my steps and them,
dividing my attentions, here then there.
127* And, when the ending of the hymn had come,
they cried aloud, ‘Virum non cognosco!’
then, singing low, began the hymn again.
130 That ﬁnished, they all cried once more: ‘Diana,
guarding her woodlands, drove out Helice
who’d felt what bitter poison Venus sends.’
133 And yet again they now began their song,
then called on men and women who were chaste –
as virtue and our marriages demand.

136 This form of song will serve for them, I think,
throughout the time the ﬁre is scorching them.
With this concern and fed by foods like this,
139 sin’s ﬁnal wound is sewn up once again.

CANTO 26

1 While on, in single ﬁle, we went around
the rim – my trusted teacher saying often:
‘Careful! I’ll point the dangers out. Attend!’ –
4 the sun was beating on my right-hand side,
its rays illuminating all the west,
changing its face from clearest blue to white.
7 And I, in casting shadows on the ﬂame,
made ﬁre seem ﬁerier. Then many shades,
I saw, at that one hint, while walking on,
10 gave thought, and came, because of that,
to say of me their say. So they began:
‘He does not seem, in body, ﬁction-formed.’
13 And then, as far towards me as they could,
they pressed to make quite sure – with constant care
lest any come where they should not be burned.
16 ‘You there (who, following the other two,
aren’t slow, maybe, but mean to show respect)
please answer me. I burn in ﬁre and thirst.
19 Nor will your answer serve for me alone.
For all of us are thirsting more for this
than Ethiopes or Indians for cool streams.
22 Tell us: how do you make yourself a wall
to shield the sun, as if you had not yet
entered within the trammels of death’s net?’
25 These words from one of them. And I’d have said
already who I was, except my mind
was set on something new that now appeared.

28 For down the middle of the blazing path,
facing the ﬁrst, there came another group.
This made me pause in answering, and gaze.
31 I saw on either side the shadows kiss.
They did not cease, however, in their course,
each one content to keep the frolic brief.
34 In that same way, within their darkening ranks,
ants nuzzle other ants, when columns meet,
to scout the road ahead or spy on fate.
37 These friends, once parted from their warm embrace,
before their forward steps can speed them on,
strain, each one louder than the next, to yell
40* (the new arrivals), ‘Sodom! Gomorrah!’
‘Into the cow’ (the rest) ‘went Pasiphae
to let the bull calf run his lust in her.’
43* As ﬂocks of cranes divide – some ﬂying north
to ﬁnd the Riphean steeps, while some seek sand
(the second can’t stand chill; the former, sun),
46 one lot went oﬀ, the other went oﬀ, too,
all turning, weeping, to their former song,
each to the slogan that most suited them.
49 Then those same souls who’d pleaded with me ﬁrst
came to my side, as they had done before
and, from the look of them, were keen to hear.
52 And I (who’d now seen twice what they found good)
began: ‘You souls, quite certain to arrive –
whenever that time comes – at perfect peace,
55 my living limbs have not remained back there,
not aged and ripe, nor youthful green. They’re here.
They travel with me, blood and joints entire.
58 I make this climb to be no longer blind.
A lady up above besought this grace
that through your world I bear my mortal part.
61 Yet – may your greater longing soon be fed,
so that you come to lodge at rest in Heaven,
which, ranging wide and free, is full of peace –

64 tell me, so I may rule a page for this,
who might you be, and who’s within that crowd
that’s going on its way behind your backs?’
67 These shadows in appearance now all stood
as mountain yokels stand – no diﬀerently –
in dumbstruck stupefaction, staring round,
70 when, red-necked, rough, they make it, ﬁrst, to town.
But once they’d set astonishment aside
(it’s quickly blunted in a noble heart),
73 ‘Blessèd be you, who round our border lands,’
the shade who ﬁrst had questioned me began,
‘haul in experience for your better death!
76* Those folk who do not follow in our track
oﬀended as did Caesar – who once heard
“You queen!”, when triumphing, yelled out at him.
79 Then they, as they depart, are crying, “Sodom!”
to castigate themselves as you have heard,
bringing self-shame to aid the scorching ﬁre.
82* Our sin, by contrast, was hermaphrodite.
And since we paid no heed to human law –
choosing to follow bestial appetites –
85 ourselves we read out our opprobrium,
speaking, on leaving here, the name of one
who made herself a beast in beastlike planks.
88 So now you know our guilt and what we did.
But if you seek to know us each by name,
there is no time – and I don’t know them all.
91* I shall diminish what you want of me.
I’m Guido Guinizelli. Since I mourned
my sins before my end, I’m here made clean.’
94* Like those two sons, who, when Lycurgus grieved,
were made to see their mother once again,
so I became (though I don’t reach those heights),
97 listening as now he named himself, the sire
of me and all those (better men) who ever
wrote about love in sweet and well-poised rhyme.

100 Hearing and saying nothing, deep in thought,
I walked a while, just marvelling at him,
yet did not – since the ﬁre was there – draw near.
103 Then, having pastured fully on that gaze,
I gave myself entirely to his service,
with gestures of the kind that win good faith.
106 To me he said: ‘Through what I hear, you leave
so clear a trace and footprint in my mind,
Lethe won’t cancel it or make it fade.
109 But, if the oath you took just now holds true,
tell me, why is it that, in word and look,
you show so frankly that you hold me dear?’
112 And I to him: ‘That smooth, sweet verse you wrote
will make its very ink most dearly prized
as long as present usage still endures.’
115 ‘Brother,’ he said, ‘the one I single out’
(his ﬁnger pointing to a soul ahead)
‘crafted the mother tongue with greater skill.
118* Lyrics of love, in prose the French Romance –
all these he far surpassed. Let idiots talk,
rating that poet from Limoges ahead.
121 Their gaze is turned to chatter more than truth.
They settle their opinions long before
reason or art is heard within their thoughts.
124 That’s what they did with Fra Guittone once,
proclaiming, on and on, his proven worth
until, with many more, the truth won through.
127 Now since you’re granted generous privilege
to pass within those cloistered corridors,
where Christ is abbot of the brotherhood,
130 then say a Paternoster for me there –
as much, at least, as we, in this world, need –
where no ability to sin is ours.’
133 Maybe to give another, nearby, space,
he disappeared at this point through the ﬁre,
as ﬁsh do going to the water’s depth.

136 I made towards the soul he’d pointed out,
and said that my desires were gratefully
disposed to ﬁnd a ﬁt place for his name.
139* And, free and open, he began to speak:
‘Tan m’abellis vostre cortes deman ,
qu’ieu no me puesc ni voill a vos cobrire ,
142 Ieu sui Arnaut, que plor e vau cantan;
consiros vei la passada folor ,
e vei jausen lo joi qu’esper denan.
145 Ara vos prec, per aquella valor
que vos guida al som de l’escalina ,
sovenha vos a temps de ma dolor.’
148 He hid then in the ﬁre that sharpens them.

CANTO 27

1* As when it strikes its ﬁrst vibrating rays
where once its own Creator shed His blood
(the river Ebro falling under Libra’s height,
4 while Ganges’ waves are scorched by noon-time heat)
at that degree the sun now stood. So day
was leaving when, in joy, God’s angel showed.
7* Beyond the ﬂame, he stood there on the bank,
and sang the words ‘Beati mundo corde!’ ,
his voice far more alive than ours can be.
10 And then: ‘None can, you holy souls, proceed
until the ﬁre has bitten them. Go in.
And do not turn deaf ears to what is sung!’
13 he said to us, as we came near to him.
And I became, on seeing what he meant,
as though, still living, placed within a tomb.
16 Over my suppliant hands entwined, I leaned
just staring at the ﬁre, imagining
bodies of human beings I’d seen burn.
19 And both my trusted guides now turned to me.
And Virgil spoke, to say: ‘My dearest son,
here may be agony but never death.
22* Remember this! Remember! And if I
led you to safety on Geryon’s back,
what will I do when now so close to God?
25* Believe this. And be sure. Were you to stay
a thousand years or more wombed in this ﬁre,
you’d not be made the balder by one hair.

28 And if, perhaps, you think I’m tricking you,
approach the ﬁre and reassure yourself,
trying with your own hands your garment’s hem.
31 Have done, I say, have done with fearfulness.
Turn this way. Come and enter safely in!’
But I, against all conscience, stood stock still.
34 And when he saw me stiﬀ and obstinate,
he said, a little troubled: ‘Look, my son,
between Beatrice and you there’s just this wall.’
37* As Pyramus, on hearing Thisbe’s name,
opened his eyelids at the point of death,
and (mulberries turning crimson) gazed at her,
40 so, too – my obstinacy softening now –
I turned to hear her name, which, growing still,
thrives in my thinking to my guide, so wise.
43 Saying ‘What’s this?’ he shook his head. ‘Would you
prefer we stayed on this side?’ Then he smiled
as though to see a child won round by apples.
46 Ahead of me, he went to meet the ﬁre,
and begged that Statius, who had walked the road
so long between us, now take up the rear.
49 And, once within, I could have ﬂung myself –
the heat that ﬁre produced was measureless –
for coolness, in a vat of boiling glass.
52 To strengthen me, my sweetest father spoke,
as on he went, of Beatrice always,
saying, ‘It seems I see her eyes already.’
55 And, guiding us, a voice sang from beyond.
So we, attending only to that voice,
came out and saw where now we could ascend.
58* ‘Venite, benedicti Patris mei!’
sounded within what little light there was.
This overcame me and I could not look.
61 ‘The sun departs,’ he added. ‘Evening comes.
Don’t stop. Think hard about your speed. Keep up,
as long as western skies have not turned dark.’

64 The pathway through the rock rose sheer and straight
and angled so I cut, ahead of me,
the rays of sunlight, which had now sunk low.
67 The steps the sages and myself assayed
were few until – my shadow petering out –
we sensed the sun behind us laid to rest.
70 Before the sky’s horizon had assumed
one look in all its vast unmeasured parts
(night gathering all within its lawful bounds)
73 on separate stairs we each had made our beds.
The mountain by its natural law had wrecked
our power to climb and all delight in that.
76 Compare: goats, ruminating, mildly stand
where ﬁrst, before they’d fed, they raced above
the summits of the hills, eager, untamed,
79 now, while the sun seethes, muted in the shade –
their herdsman watching over them, leaning
against his stick, so they can safely rest.
82 And shepherds, too, will lodge outdoors beside
their ﬂocks, and calmly spend the night on guard,
so predators can’t come to scatter them.
85 That is what, now, all three of us were like –
they as my shepherds and the she-goat, me –
tucked up on either side by towering rock.
88 Little was visible of things beyond.
Yet, by that ‘little’ I could see the stars
brighter than usual, and of greater size.
91 So, ruminating, wondering so at these,
sleep grasped me now – that sleep which often will, before
the fact appears, tell all that’s new.
94* At that hour, so I think, when, from the east,
Cytherea casts her ﬁrst rays on the hill
(seeming to blaze, as always, in love’s ﬁre),
97 lovely and young, a donna in a dream
appeared to me and walked along the lea,
plucking its ﬂowers and singing as she said:

100 ‘Let anyone who asks me for my name
know I am Leah, and my lovely hands
fashion my garland as I move them round.
103 I dress here so my mirror gives me joy.
My sister Rachel, though, entranced, won’t cease
to sit all day in wonder at her glass.
106 She yearns to see her own delightful eyes,
as I desire to dress by my own hands.
Seeing, for her, is all – as doing is for me.
109* Driven before bright antelucan rays
(which pilgrims, in returning, welcome more
since now they’ve lodged one night less far from home),
112 shadowy dark now ﬂed on every side
and, with these shades, my sleep. At which I rose,
and saw my masters were already up.
115 ‘The sweetest apple that the mortal heart
seeks in the branches with such urgency
today will oﬀer all your cravings peace.’
118 These words were those that Virgil used on me.
And never had such tokens of good luck
been equal in the pleasure that they gave.
121 Desire beyond desire came over me
to be up there. And so, at every pace,
my plumage grew, I felt, more quick to ﬂy.
124 Below us now, the stair had run its course,
and we were on the highest of the steps.
Then, ﬁrmly, Virgil ﬁxed his eyes on me,
127 saying: ‘The temporal and eternal ﬁres
you’ve seen, my son, and now you’re in a place
where I, through my own powers, can tell no more.
130 I’ve drawn you here by skill and searching mind.
Now take what pleases you to be your guide.
You’re now beyond the steeps, beyond all straits.
133 The sun, you see, is shining on your brow.
You see the bushes, fresh, young grass, and ﬂowers.
The earth by its own powers brings this to be.

136 Until, in joy, those lovely eyes appear
that, weeping, made me come to be your guide,
through these you may go walking, or may sit.
139 No longer look to me for signs or word.
Your will is healthy, upright, free and whole.
And not to heed that sense would be a fault.

CANTO 28

1* Aching to search, now, in and all around
that holy forest, dense, alive and bright,
which tempered to my eyes the newborn day,
4 not pausing anymore, I left the verge,
treading in slow, slow steps across the ﬁeld.
The earth below breathed scent on every side.
7 A gentle breeze, unchanging in itself,
struck on my forehead, yet with no more force
than would the smoothest of our changing winds.
10 To this the branches, trembling in response,
yielded, all bending to the place at which
the sacred mountain casts its earliest shade,
13 and yet not leaning so far out of true
that ﬂedglings perched among the topmost boughs
were forced to leave the practice of their trade.
16 But, full of happiness, they greet the dawn,
singing among the foliage which holds
a steady undertone to all their tunes –
19* as in those notes that gather, branch by branch,
through all the pines along Ravenna’s shore
when, from the south, sciroccos start to blow.
22 My steady steps by now had carried me
so deep within the ancient wood that I
could not see back to where I’d entered ﬁrst.
25 Look there! A brook held back my onward pace.
Its course was leftward, and its little waves
swayed all the grass that rose along its banks.

28 The purest waters that down here may ﬂow
would seem to have admixtures in their depths
compared with those, which don’t hide anything.
31 And yet these waters move dark, dark beneath
a shadow that’s perpetual and allows
no ray of sun or moonlight ever through.
34 My pace here checked, I passed in sight alone
beyond that stream, to see and wonder at
these May-things in abundance varying.
37 And then appeared to me – as things appear
that suddenly in wonder will deﬂect
the claims of every other thought we have –
40* a donna all alone who walked along,
singing and choosing ﬂowers to pluck from ﬂowers
that painted all the way she went upon.
43 ‘Lady, you warm yourself in rays of love,
or so I think, to see your lovely looks –
these usually bear witness to the heart.
46 May you incline, in will, to move more close,’
sighing I said, ‘towards this ﬂowing stream,
so I may understand the song you sing.
49 You make me call to mind Proserpina,
both where and what she was – when she lost Spring
and her own mother lost all sight of her.’
52 Her feet together, ﬁrmly pressed to ground
as when a donna dances, she then turned
and, scarcely setting foot in front of foot,
55 she turned above the yellow and the red
of tender ﬂowers, as virgin girls will do
when they, for decency, dip down their eyes.
58 Then she in full responded to my prayers,
bringing herself so near that that sweet sound
came to me, with the meanings that it bore.
61 And now, the moment she’d arrived at where
the grass was bathed by waves from that ﬁne stream, she
made a gift to me: she raised her eyes.

64* I do not think so great a light shone out
beneath the brows of Venus when her son
pierced her with love beyond his usual stroke.
67 She stood there, laughing, on the other bank
arranging many colours in her hands,
strewn by the mighty earth without a seed.
70* The river kept us still three steps apart.
And yet the Hellespont where Xerxes passed
(a bridle still on all our human pride)
73 did not so much incur Leander’s hate,
when oceans raged from Sest to Abydos,
as this did mine because it would not part.
76 ‘You are both new,’ she now began to say,
‘in this place, chosen for the human race
to make its nest. And you stand wondering,
79* perhaps because I smile, caught up in doubt.
The psalm, though, “Delectasti” sheds a light
that may dispel the clouds around your mind.
82 And you who begged me speak – the one ahead –
say if there’s any more you wish to hear.
I’ll quickly come to answer you in full.’
85 ‘These waters, and the sound the forest makes,
battle within me with a newborn faith
in something I’ve heard contrary to this.’
88* At which she said: ‘I’ll tell you, then, the cause
from which those things you wonder at derive,
and thus will purge the fog that strikes at you.
91 The Highest Good – alone its own delight –
made human beings good and ﬁt for good,
and gave this place as pledge of endless peace.
94 Through his own fault, Man did not dwell here long.
Through his own fault, to weeping and to grief
he changed his noble laughter and sweet play.
97 Water and earth below breathe vapours out
that search, as fully as they can, for heat,
and this induces turbulence down there.

100 Yet, so that these should bring no harm to men,
this mountain climbs and reaches to the sky,
free of these swirls from where the gate is locked.
103 But now, because the circling sphere of air,
if that’s not interrupted in some part,
turns altogether as the heavens turn,
106 that motion, unconstrained in living air,
will strike directly on this utmost peak
and make the forest, being dense, sound out.
109 And plants here, when they’re struck, have such great
strength
that, with its natural power they seed the breeze,
which then, in circling round, will scatter this.
112 The other hemisphere – as far as soil
is right, and climate suits – conceives and bears
plants in variety with various powers.
115 And hearing this, it would not seem, down there,
a source of wonder if a plant takes root
without there being, visibly, a seed.
118 And you should know that all this holy ﬁeld
is ﬁlled where you are now with every seed,
and here has fruits which, there, are never plucked.
121 The water that you see is from no well
(as rivers are that gain and lose in force)
that’s freshly ﬁlled when ice condenses mist,
124 but issues, sure and steady, from a spring
that gathers all it has from God’s own will,
which then it pours out, opening in two parts.
127 It ﬂows, in this part, down with all its power
to take the memory of sin away,
restoring, on the other, all good done.
130* Its name is Lethe here, Eunoe there.
Until a taste is had on either side,
the inﬂuence it has won’t take eﬀect.
133 This savour is above all other tastes

and – though your thirst would none the less be slaked if I
disclosed to you no more than this – 136 I’ll add one
footnote, out of grace and thanks.
(I cannot think you’ll hold my words less dear
if these soar out beyond my promised theme.)
139* Those who, in times long gone, composed those
poems
that sang the Age of Gold and all its joys
thought, maybe here’s Parnassus when they dreamed.
142 Here, once, the root of man was innocent.
Here, there is always spring and every fruit.
And that’s the nectar they all speak about.’
145 I swung around to face my poets there,
and both (as I could tell) had smiled to hear
the meaning of the words that she’d spelled out.
148 I then turned back to see that lovely girl.

CANTO 29

1* Singing as might some donna deep in love,
she then went on and brought an end to words:
‘Beati quorum tecta sunt peccata.’
4 And then, as nymphs who, once, would go alone
through woodland shadows longing, some of them,
to see the sun while others ﬂed its rays,
7 she moved, against the course that clear stream ran,
walking along her bank while I kept up,
with small steps too, pursuing her small pace.
10 Before a hundred steps had gone (to count
both hers and mine) the banks on either side
curved equally, so I was facing east.
13 Nor did our path continue so for long,
until the lady turned direct to me,
saying: ‘Dear brother, watch now and listen.’
16* And look! A sudden radiance, darting all
around, pierced that great forest through and through, at
which I thought that lightning may have struck.
19 But lightning, when it comes, is quenched at once,
where this, enduring, shone out more and more.
So I was left, thought muttering: ‘What is this?’
22 And then, through all that luminous air, there ran
a melody so ﬁne that purest zeal
made me reprove the recklessness of Eve.
25 Where earth and Heaven displayed obedience,
a woman, one alone, formed only now,
was not content to stay beneath the veil.

28 Had she in true devotion stayed beneath,
I should have known these pleasures, past all speech, far
sooner and enjoyed them at more length.
31 While on I went among these primal fruits,
the pleasures yielded by eternity,
caught up, desiring yet more happiness,
34 ahead of us, beneath the branching green,
the air blazed up like newly kindled ﬁre,
and that sweet sound was clearly heard as song.
37* You holy virgin Muses, if, for you,
I’ve ever suﬀered vigils, fast or cold,
there’s now all reason to beseech your aid.
40 Now Helicon must pour in streams for me,
Urania with her choirs assist me here,
to put in verse things hardly thinkable.
43* Just further on were seven trees of gold –
that semblance given them, mistakenly,
by distance that, between us, intervened.
46 But when I’d got so near to them that now
(far oﬀ, aspectuals can fool our sense)
these things lost nothing of their proper form,
49 that power that sends (as manna) rational thought,
discerned that these were candle-bearing staves,
and heard ‘Hosanna’ in that singing voice.
52 These ﬁne devices ﬂamed around their heights
far clearer than the moon in tranquil skies,
at midnight in the middle of a month.
55 Filled full of radiant wonder, I turned round
to honest Virgil, and he answered me
with looks no less weighed down by heavy awe.
58 I then restored my gaze to those high things
that came towards us now and moved so slow
that new-wed brides would quickly have gone past.
61 The lady reprimanded me: ‘Why burn,
so moved, to see alone these living lights
and fail to look at what comes after them?’

64 I then saw people guided by the ﬂames,
now coming near to us. Their robes were white,
of brilliant purity not seen down here.
67 The water to my left reﬂected ﬁre,
and rendered back to me, if I looked down,
as mirrors do, the sight of my left side.
70 When, on my own bank, I had reached a place
where I was distanced only by the stream,
I brought my steps to rest, to see them well.
73 I saw those ﬂames, diminishing, move on,
leaving behind a paint stroke in the air,
as though they all drew pennants after them,
76* so that, above them, there were seven streams,
their colours those the sun makes with its bow
or else the girdle of the Delian moon.
79 These pennants stretched far back beyond my sight.
The outer two, as far as I could tell,
were drawn on through the air ten steps apart.
82 And under this ﬁne sky, as here described,
were elders – twenty-four – who walked in pairs,
and each of them was crowned with ﬂeurs-de-lys.
85 And all of these were singing: ‘You among
the daughters born to Adam are benedicta ,
your beauty blessed to all eternity.’
88 And when, across from me, the other bank –
with all its ﬂowers and other fresh young growth – was
free of these, who were the chosen ones,
91* as light lights up in sequence through the sky,
there came behind them now four animals,
and each of these was crowned with boughs of green.
94 And each was ﬂedged and feathered with six wings.
These feathers all were peacock-eyed. The eyes
of Argus would, if they still lived, be like this.
97 I’ll scatter, reader, no more rhymes to trace
what these forms were. Other expenditure
constrains me; I cannot be generous.

100 But read Ezekiel, who paints them all
as once he saw them, coming from cold climes
in whirlwinds, towering clouds and folds of ﬁre.
103 And as you’ll ﬁnd them written on his page,
so were they there, except that, as to wings,
Saint John is with me, and departs from him.
106 The space that lay between these four contained
a two-wheeled chariot in triumphal state.
A gryphon drew it, harnessed at the neck.
109 This gryphon held his two wings stretched on high
between the middle band and three and three,
so that, in cleaving air, he did no harm.
112 These wings rose higher than the eye could see.
The bird-limbs of that form were all of gold,
the others white, commingling with bright red.
115* Not only did not Rome cheer Scipio
with such ﬁne chariots (or Caesar, even!)
the sun itself beside that would look poor –
118 the sun that burned to nothing when it strayed
(here Jove for his dark reasons once proved just)
in answer to the prayers of pious earth.
121* Beside the right-hand wheel, three ladies came,
all dancing in a ring, the ﬁrst so red
that she, in ﬁre, would hardly have been seen,
124 the next as if her very bones and ﬂesh
were fashioned from the freshest emerald,
the third like snow just fallen from the sky.
127 Their steps were drawn, it seems, by, ﬁrst, the white,
then red, and from the song that this one sang
the others took their tempo, fast or slow.
130 Four ladies to the left, all purple-clothed,
rejoiced in following the melody
of one of them, whose brow displayed three eyes.
133 Then, close within the track of this tight knot,
I saw two elders, diﬀering in their garb,
but equal in demeanour, grave and ﬁrm

136 One showed himself a close familiar
of great Hippocrates, whom Nature formed
to serve the creatures that she loved the best.
139 The other showed the opposite concern,
a well-honed sword in hand – so bright and keen
it brought me terror from beyond the stream.
142 I then saw four, each one with humble looks,
and after these, an old man all alone,
who came as though still sleeping, face alert.
145 These seven were clothed as was the ﬁrst brigade
except that, as they came, around their heads,
they wore no garland formed of lilia,
148 but roses, rather, and vermilion ﬂowers.
And, standing just a short way oﬀ, you’d swear
that all, above their brows, bore searing ﬁre.
151 When, now, that chariot stood facing me,
thunder was heard. These people of great worth
were banned, it seemed, from going further on.
154 With standards to the fore, they halted there.

CANTO 30

1* Those Seven Polar Stars that constellate
the highest sphere, and never knowing nadir
or zenith, veiled by the murk of sin alone,
4 those stars that make the souls, in Heaven, aware
of what is right (as, by our Wain, down here,
a helmsman turns his wheel to steer for port)
7 stopped and stood ﬁrm. The people of the truth –
who marched between the Gryphon and these stars –
turned, as though each found peace, towards the chariot.
10* And one of them, as sent from Heaven, cried out:
‘Veni, sponsa, de Libano!’ singing
(the others followed on) this verse three times.
13 As when the Last New Day is heralded,
and happy souls will rise keen from their caves,
dressed in new voice, to echo ‘Alleluia’
16 so now, ad vocem tanti senis , there arose
above the hallowed chariot a hundred
angels, all bearing news of eternal life.
19 They spoke thus: ‘Benedictus qui venis!’
and, strewing petals upward and around:
‘Manibus , oh, date lilia plenis!’
22* I saw, once, at the opening of the day,
the orient sky in colour all clear rose,
the western height still robed in tranquil blue,
25 and then the sun newborn, with shadowed face,
hazy, in vapours that so tempered it
that eyes could tolerate its light a while.

28 So now, beyond a drifting cloud of ﬂowers
(which rose up, arching, from the angels’ hands,
then fell within and round the chariot),
31 seen through a veil, pure white, and olive-crowned,
a lady now appeared to me. Her robe was green,
her dress the colour of a living ﬂame.
34 And I, in spirit, who so long had not
been, trembling in her presence, wracked by awe,
began again to tremble at her glance
37 (without more evidence that eyes could bring,
but darkly, through the good that ﬂowed from her),
sensing the ancient power of what love was.
40 But on the instant that it struck my sight –
this power, this virtue, that had pierced me through
before I’d even left my boyhood state –
43 I turned aside (and leftwards) meaning now,
with all the hope and deference of some child
that runs when hurt or frightened to its mum,
46* to say to Virgil: ‘There is not one gram
of blood in me that does not tremble now.
I recognize the signs of ancient ﬂame.’
49 But Virgil was not there. Our lack alone
was left where once he’d been. Virgil, dear sire,
Virgil – to him I’d run to save my soul.
52 Nor could the All our primal mother lost,
ensure my cheeks – which he once washed with dew –
should not again be sullied with dark tears.
55 ‘Dante, that Virgil is no longer here,
do not yet weep, do not yet weep for that.
A diﬀerent sword cut, ﬁrst, must make you weep.’
58 From stern to prow, some admiral will pace
to see how well, in other hulls, his captains fare,
and seek to hearten them to do their best.
61* So, almost (left along the chariot),
turning around to hear my own name voiced
(I here record it of necessity),

64 I saw my donna – who’d at ﬁrst appeared
hidden in garlands of angelic joy –
ﬁx, from beyond the brook, her eyes on me,
67 though still the veil descending from her brows,
encircled with Minerva’s olive fronds,
did not allow, distinctly, any sight of her.
70 Her look was stern and proud. With sovereign strength,
she then went on, and spoke as though she still
held back, until the last, her ﬁeriest words.
73 ‘Look. I am, truly, I am Beatrice.
What right had you to venture to this mount?
Did you not know that all are happy here?’
76 My eyes fell, glancing to the spring-clear brook,
but, seeing me in that, shame bent my brow.
I dragged my gaze back to the grassy bank.
79 A mother, to her son, looks stern and proud.
So she appeared to me. For true concern
is bitter to the taste and quick to sting.
82* She did not speak; but suddenly, as one,
the angels sang: ‘In te, Domine, speravi’ ,
but did not go beyond the ‘pedes meos’ .
85 Compare: the snow that falls through growing eaves
freezes the spine of Italy in drifts
blown and compacted by Slavonian winds.
88 But when the southern lands (where shadow fails)
breathe once again, within itself it thaws,
then trickles down, as candles melt in ﬂames.
91 So, too, until those beings sang – their notes
are all concordant with the heavenly spheres –
I’d been there uttering no sigh or tear.
94 And yet, on hearing, through these harmonies,
their pity on me (it seemed they had said:
‘Why, donna , cause him discord such as this?’),
97 the ice, so tightly stretched around my core,
turned now to breath and water, issuing,
at mouth and eye, in spasms from my heart.

100 Then she (still leftwards on the chariot),
unmoved and standing ﬁrm, addressed her words
to these true beings, so compassionate:
103 ‘You wake, in vigil, through eternal day.
So neither night nor sleep can steal from you
a single step that time takes, travelling by.
106 Thus, answering, my greater care must be
that he, in tears there, grasps what I intend,
and brings to balance all his grief and guilt.
109 Not only by the work of Heaven’s great wheels
that send, with its companion stars, each seed
along the road towards its rightful end,
112 but also by those holy generosities
that rain in grace from clouded powers so high
that human sight can come in no way near,
115 this man through all his new life, fresh and young,
in virtual power was one who might have proved,
in all of his behaviour, wonderful.
118 Yet there, on earth, the richer soil may be,
the more – untilled or sown with evil seed –
its vigour turns to wilderness and bane.
121 I, looking on, sustained him for a time.
My eyes, when bright with youth, I turned to him,
and led him with me on the road to truth.
124* Then, on the threshold of my second age,
I changed, took diﬀerent life, and he at once
drew back and yielded to another’s glance.
127 Risen from body into spirit-form,
my goodness, power and beauty grew more strong.
Yet I to him was then less dear, less pleasing.
130 He turned his steps to paths that were not true.
He followed images of failing good
which cannot meet, in full, their promises.
133 And when I prayed that he might be inspired,
seeking to call him back – by dreams and other ways –
all that came to nothing. He paid little heed.

136 He fell so far that every other means
to save this man, by now, came short, unless
he saw, himself, those people who are lost.
139 I went, then, to the doorway of the dead,
and, weeping, my entreaties there were borne
to one who, since, has brought him to these heights.
142 God’s high decree would shatter, though, if he
should pass by the Lethe and go on to taste
the food of life, yet leave unpaid the tax
145 of penitence, which pours out ﬂowing tears.’

CANTO 31

1 ‘You, who are there beyond the sacred stream,’
turning the sword point of her words on me
(the edge alone had seemed quite keen enough),
4 so, without lapse continuing, she began,
‘Say, say, if this is true. To such a charge
your own confession needs to be conjoined.’
7 My natural powers by now were so confused
that voice began to move, and yet gave out
before it cleared the larynx and the throat.
10 She bore this for a while, and then she said:
‘Respond to me. Your wretched memories
have not been struck through yet by Lethe’s stream.’
13 Fear and confusion, intermixed in me,
drove from my lips a ‘yes’ so hard to hear
it needed sight to make it understood.
16 A crossbow triggered under too much stress
snaps its own string and splinters at the arc.
Its shaft thus hits the target with less force.
19 I burst in that same way beneath the load
and, shedding streams of sighs and sobs and tears, my
voice came slack and slow along its course.
22 And so: ‘In your desire for me,’ she said,
‘which then was leading you to love the Good
beyond which we cannot aspire to reach,
25 what ditches or what chains across your path
did you discover that led you to strip
the hopes you had of getting further on?

28 What easements, proﬁts, gain or beneﬁt
displayed themselves to you on other brows
that you preferred to ﬂounce within their sight?’
31 I drew the bitterest of sighs, but then
I hardly had the voice left to respond.
My lips were labouring to give to words some form.
34 Weeping, I said: ‘Mere things of here and now
and their false pleasures turned my steps away
the moment that your face had hid itself.’
37 ‘Had you,’ she said, ‘been silent, or denied
what you confess, your guilt would equally
have been observed. It’s known to such a judge!
40 But when the plea of guilty, in this court,
bursts, freely uttered, from the sinner’s cheek,
the grindstone here will turn against the blade.
43 And yet – so you may bear the proper shame
your error brings and, hearing, once again,
the siren call you may show greater strength –
46 put to one side the seed that nurtures tears.
Listen and hear how down a diﬀerent path
my ﬂesh, when buried, should have made you move.
49 Never had art or nature shown to you
such beauty and delight as did those limbs
in which I was enclosed, now strewn in earth.
52 And if that great delight, because I died,
did fail for you, what other dying thing
should then have drawn you to desire of it?
55 Pierced by the arrows of fallacious things,
you should at once have raised yourself on high,
to follow me, I being none such now.
58* You ought not to have weighed your feathers down
just waiting to be stricken by some girl,
or other novelty of short-lived use.
61 A newborn chick will take a blow or two.
But arrows ﬂy, and nets are spread in vain,
before the eyes of any fully ﬂedged.’

64 As little boys who stand there dumb with shame,
eyes on the ground and listening to what’s said,
aware – very sorry – of what they are,
67 so I, too, simply stood. And she said: ‘Since
you grieve at what you’re hearing, raise your beard and,
looking up, you’ll feel still greater pain.’
70* With less resistance some well-sinewed oak
is rooted out by northern winds of ours,
or blasts from savage Iarbas’ Libyan realm,
73 than I at her command raised up my chin.
And when she spoke of ‘beard’ (to name my face),
I knew the venom that her meaning bore.
76 But as I stretched to show my face to her,
those primal creatures, as my eyes observed,
had ceased in scattering their arc of ﬂowers.
79 Those lights of mine, still very far from sure,
saw Beatrice turn towards the beast,
being two natures and, in person, one.
82 Beneath her veil, beyond the ﬂowing stream,
she overcame, it seemed, what once she’d been,
when once, as here, she overcame all women.
85 The nettle of remorse now stung so sharp,
whatever else had drawn me most to love
became for me my utmost enemy.
88* It gnawed my heart – the consciousness of this –
that, overwhelmed, I fell. What I became,
she knows who is the cause of why I did.
91 Then when my heart gave back my outward powers,
the donna whom I’d found there all alone,
I saw above me, saying: ‘Grip me! Grip!’
94 She’d drawn me up to throat height in the stream,
and, pulling me behind her, went her way
across the wave as light as any skiﬀ.
97* And then, when I approached the blessed shore,
‘Asperges me’ was heard, so sweetly sung
I can’t remember it, still less can write.

100 That lovely lady, opening wide her arms,
circled my head, submerging me so far
I could not help but swallow from the stream.
103 From there she took and led me, bathed, still wet,
to join the dance of those four lovely ones.
And each one raised an arm to cover me.
106 ‘We, here, are nymphs and, in the heavens, stars,
given to Beatrice as her maids,
before she ﬁrst descended to the world.
109 We’ll lead you to her eyes. Yet to that light,
so jubilant, within, those three beyond –
their gaze still deeper – will make yours more keen.’
112 So, singing, they began and, moving on,
they brought me with them to the Gryphon’s breast,
where, turned towards us, Beatrice stood.
115 ‘Make sure,’ they said, ‘you do not spare your eyes.
We’ve placed you here before these emeralds,
from which Love aimed his arrows at you once.’
118 A thousand longings, ﬁercer far than ﬂame,
wrestled my eyes to her eyes, shining back,
ﬁxed on the Gryphon, never wavering.
121 No diﬀerently from sun in mirror glass,
the twyform beast shone rays into her eyes,
displaying one and then the other kind.
124* Reader, just think how great my wonder was
to see that creature stilled within itself
and yet – within that icon – altering.
127 And, while astounded, yet so full of joy,
my soul received the savour of the food
that feeds us full and makes us thirst for more,
130 the other three who showed, in all they did,
that they were scions of a greater tribe
came forward, to their angel’s chant, en loure.
133 ‘Turn, Beatrice, turn your holy eyes’
(their song went thus) ‘on your most faithful one who, for
your sight, has moved so many steps.

136 In grace, we beg, do us the grace to lift
the veil that veils your lips so he can tell
the second beauty that you still conceal.’
139 Splendour of living and eternal light!
Who would not seem – though pale from studying
deep in Parnassian shade, whose wells he drinks – 142 still
to be much encumbered in his mind,
endeavouring to draw what you then seemed,
where heavens in harmony alone enshadow you,
145 as you came forth and showed yourself in air?

CANTO 32

1* My eyes were now so ﬁxedly intent
to free themselves from that decade-long thirst
that every sense but sight had been eclipsed.
4 This side and that, my eyes were walled about
with ‘I-don’t-care-at-all’ (the holy smile
so drew them to it with its age-old net!),
7 when, by sheer force, my face was turned around
towards my left by all those deities,
hearing from them a ‘Far too ﬁxedly!’
10 And that debility that’s found in eyes
when just now stricken by a blinding sun
here left me, for some moments, without sight.
13 But when my eye refocused on the less
(the ‘less’ I mean in contrast to that great
thing seen from which, with strain, I’d turned away) 16 the
glorious army had, I saw, right-wheeled –
those seven ﬂames ahead – to face the sun,
and so to make its march towards the east.
19 As, to protect itself, a squadron turns,
wheeling beneath its shields around the ﬂag,
till every man has made a turnabout,
22 so, too, those troops of that celestial realm
that marched in front went by us, rank by rank,
before the chariot had turned its pole.
25 The donne then went back beside its wheels.
The Gryphon drew its blessèd burden on.
And not a single feather stirred or fell.

28 The lovely one who’d drawn me through the pass,
Statius and I now followed – at that wheel
which, in its orbit, traced the lesser arc.
31 So passing through that deep yet empty grove
(the fault of her who trusted in the snake),
our steps were measured to the angel song.
34 The distance that, perhaps, we travelled so,
was three ﬂights of an arrow when discharged.
And Beatrice now, at last, came down.
37 I heard them murmur ‘Adam’, all as one.
And then they circled round a leaﬂess tree.
Its every branch was stripped of greenery.
40 The crested peak which broadens out the more
the more it rises, would, for height, inspire
wonder in Hindus in their own great woods.
43 ‘Blessèd are you, the Gryphon. With your beak
you did not spoil this wood, so sweet to taste.
For, after tasting, bellies writhe, all sick.’
46 Around the mighty tree they made this cry.
And then the creature, two-formed in its birth:
‘In this way, all that’s true and just is saved.’
49 Then, turned towards the pole he’d drawn before,
towards the foot of that long-widowed sprig,
he tugged it and then left it bound to that.
52 Compare: in spring the great light of the sun
cascades on earthly trees conjoined with that
which shines out following the astral Carp.
55 These trees then swell. The colour is renewed,
in each and all, before the sun moves on
to yoke its horses to some other star.
58 So did this tree, whose boughs had hung bereft,
take on new strength, in colour opening
to more than violet and to less than rose.
61 I did not understand (it’s not sung here)
the hymn these people sang, nor could I bear
in full the beauty of its harmonies.

64 If I could trace the drowsiness that came
on hearing Syrinx sung to ruthless eyes –
those eyes that wakefulness cost very dear –
67 then, from that model, as a painter paints,
I’d draw in my design how I now slept.
But that needs someone who can feign sleep well.
70 So I speed on to when I came awake,
and say how splendour tore apart sleep’s veil
and this cry: ‘Rise! What are you doing there?’
73 When brought to see the budding apple ﬂowers
which make the angels greedy for their fruit,
and makes in Heaven perpetual marriage feast,
76 Peter and James and John were overcome
but, waking once again, they heard that word
which shattered greater sleeps than theirs had been, 79
and saw the school they’d sat in two souls short –
since Moses and Elijah both had gone –
their teacher with his robe now much transformed.
82 So, too, I woke, and saw, above me there,
the one who in compassion led my steps
along the river sometime earlier.
85 And, full of doubt, I said: ‘Where’s Beatrice?’
At which, ‘See there,’ she said, ‘beneath the leaves – now
new – she’s seated on the root of that.
88 And see the company that encircles her!
The rest behind the Gryphon go on high,
singing a deeper, ever sweeter song.’
91 And if her speech ﬂowed further on than this,
I do not know. My eyes were set, by now,
on her. She’d closed my mind to other thoughts.
94 Alone, she sat upon that one true earth
as guard, left there to watch the chariot
which, as I’d seen, the two-form beast had tied.
97* The seven nymphs encloistered her around
and in their hands all carried lights, secure
from Aquilonian or Austral winds.

100 ‘With me a while you’ll be a woodsman here
and then, with me, a citizen eternally
in that new Rome where Christ is Roman, too.
103 And so, to aid the world that lives all wrong,
keep your eyes ﬁrmly on the chariot.
And what you see write down when you go back.’
106 Thus Beatrice. I myself, devout,
touching the feet of all that she ordained,
gave eye and mind to where she said I should.
109* No ﬁre that rains from regions farthest oﬀ
has, from the densest vapours, struck
as rapidly in motion as I saw
112 the Eagle, bird of Jupiter, swoop down
straight through the tree, to rip oﬀ all its bark – the
ﬂowers as well, and all its new green leaves.
115 It struck the chariot with all its force,
making it lurch – a ship in jeopardy,
vanquished by windward and then leeward gusts.
118 Within the cradle of the Victory Car
I saw a vixen headlong hurl herself,
starving, it seemed, for any healthy food.
121 And yet, reproving all her loathsome faults,
my lady sent that vixen oﬀ in ﬂight –
or such ﬂight as her ﬂeshless bones could bear.
124 But then from where the Eagle ﬁrst had come,
I saw it swoop down on the chariot-ark
and leave it feathered as it was itself.
127 And then, as coming from some grieving heart,
a voice came from the heavens. This voice said:
‘My little ship, what ill load weighs you down!’
130 And then, it seemed, the earth beneath both wheels
gaped wide. I saw a dragon coming out
that thrust its tail deep in the Chariot.
133 And then, as wasps do, drawing out their sting,
so did the dragon its malignant tail –
tearing out planks – then went oﬀ, wandering.

136 What wood remained, like grass in living earth,
with eagle feathers – oﬀered, as may be
with generous purpose kindly meant to heal –
139 covered itself once more and covered all,
both wheels and pole, within the time it takes
for open mouths to breathe the longest sigh.
142 Then, so transformed, the sacred structure sent
new heads out all along its many parts,
three on the pole and one on all four sides.
145 The ﬁrst three heads were horned as oxen are.
The four, though, on their brows bore single horns.
No monster like this ever has been seen.
148 As conﬁdent as strongholds in the hills,
sitting there now, a loose-wrapped whore appeared, her
ﬂickering lashes quick to look around.
151 And then I saw a giant standing by,
lest she should ever lift her eyes from him.
And every now and then these two would kiss.
154 But since her wandering and cupidinous eye
was turned on me, that rabid paramour
whipped her ferociously from head to foot.
157 Then, full of jealousy and raw, wild wrath,
he loosed the beast and led it through the wood,
so far the wood itself now formed a shield
160 between the whore and weird new beast and me.

CANTO 33

1* ‘Deus, venerunt gentes ,’ – alternating
three, then four – the seven donne , weeping
gently, sweetly, began to chant that psalm.
4 And Beatrice, sighing in compassion,
listened and changed, to hear them, hardly less
than Mary did when she stood by the Cross.
7 But when those other virgins granted her
a place to speak, she, rising to her feet,
responded, ﬁery in her colour, thus:
10 ‘Modicum, et non videbitis me ;
et iterum , my most beloved sisters,
modicum, et vos videbitis me.’
13 She then sent all those seven on ahead
and, with one gesture, brought along behind
myself, the lady and the sage who’d stayed.
16 And so she went her way, but had not placed
her tenth step on the earth (or so I think)
before her glance had pierced me, eye to eye.
19 And, calm in countenance, ‘Come on. Be quick,
so if I choose,’ she said, ‘to speak to you,
you’ll be well placed to hear what I may say.’
22 As soon as I was with her, as I ought,
‘Dear brother, now you’re walking by my side,
why don’t you seek to question me?’ she said.
25 It happened now to me (it often does
to those too reverent with superiors,
who can’t get living voice behind their teeth)

28 that I began without a full, clear sound:
‘My lady, what your need is, you well know,
and also what is good to meet that need.’
31* And she to me: ‘From dread and shame alike,
I’d have you now at once unknot yourself,
so you no longer speak as in a dream.
34 Know this: the vessel that the serpent broke
was and is not. But let the guilty one
be sure God’s vengeance need not fear grave-sops.
37 The eagle, leaving feathers on the Cart –
through which it, ﬁrst, was monster then the prey –
will not for ever be without an heir.
40 I see with certainty, and therefore say
that stars, secure from obstacle or bar,
are drawing near to give to us the hour
43 in which will come FIVE HUNDRED TEN AND FIVE
as messenger of God to slay that thief –
the giant, too, whom she makes mischief with.
46* It may be that my narrative – as dark
as those of Themis and the Sphinx – will blunt
(as theirs did), not persuade your intellect.
49 Yet real events will soon prove Naiades,
who’ll free you from this enigmatic knot
yet bring no harm to grazing sheep or grain.
52 Note well. And, as these words are borne from me,
inscribe them for a sign to those who live
the life that rapidly runs on to death.
55 And take good care, when you write all this down,
that you don’t hide how you have seen the tree,
twice over now, stripped bare and robbed of green.
58 Whoever steals from it, or tears its trunk
blasphemes, by doing so, against the God
who made it sacred for His use alone.
61 Five thousand years and more, the ﬁrst of souls –
condemned to yearning pain for biting it –
hungered for Him whose own self scourged that bite.

64 Your wits lie sleeping if you do not judge
that soaring height, inverted at the top,
to be occasioned by some unique cause.
67* And if, around your mind, your own vain thoughts
had not been calcifying Elsa streams,
their joys like Pyramus to mulberries,
70 then, from its many attributes alone,
you, in this allegory, might well have seen
that tree to be God’s justice known in bans.
73 But since I see that you, in intellect,
are turned to stone and petriﬁed, pure black,
hence dazzled by the light of what I say,
76 I wish, as well, that you’ll bear this within –
at least as image, not yet written script –
as pilgrims bring their staves back wreathed with palms.’
79 And I: ‘No less than wax, I’ll bear the print
and never change the shape impressed on it,
seeing my brain has now been signed by you.
82 But why so far above my powers of sight
does your word, so much longed for, take its ﬂight
so that the more it strives it loses more?’
85* ‘I ask,’ she said, ‘so you will know how far
that school of yours can follow what I say,
and see what its philosophy can do,
88 and also that you see how all your ways
diverge, as distant from the ways of God
as your world is, untuned, from swiftest spheres.’
91 ‘I cannot call to mind,’ I answered her,
‘that I have ever been estranged from you.
My conscience sets sharp teeth in me for that.’
94 ‘And if you cannot bring that back to mind,’
smiling, she answered me, ‘then just recall
you’ve drunk, this very day, from Lethe’s stream.
97 And if, when smoke appears, it proves there’s ﬁre,
then this oblivion will itself conclude
that guilt once drew your will away, elsewhere.

100 My words must be as naked, after this,
as far as they may ﬁttingly unveil
themselves to your as-yet-untutored sight.’
103* Its spark more brilliant and with slower step,
the sun now held the circle of the noon,
which moves (from what one sees) from side to side,
106 when, stopping – as a guide will stop, who goes
before the rest as escort if he ﬁnds
some novelty or traces of the strange –
109 the donne reached the edges of that shade
cast, as in mountains, over chilly streams
beneath green leaves and boughs of ebony.
112 Ahead of them, as from a single spring,
it seemed I saw the Tigris and Euphrates
rise and then part, like friends, reluctantly.
115 ‘You light and glory of the human race,
what are these waters that, from one sole source,
rise up then, spreading, distance each from each?’
118 To this demand: ‘Best ask,’ the answer came,
‘Matelda. She’ll reply to you.’ She did –
meaning, it seemed, to free herself from blame,
121 saying, that lovely lady: ‘I have told him why.
Both this – I’m sure of it – and other things
are not concealed from him by Lethe’s stream.’
124 And Beatrice: ‘Maybe greater cares –
which often take the memory away –
have made his mind grow darker in its view.
127 But see Eunoe, which is ﬂowing there.
Lead him to that. And, as you always do,
bring back his fainting, half-dead powers to life.’
130 As noble souls incline to do – they make
another’s will, without excuse, their will
as soon as any sign of that appears –
133 so, too, when I was taken by the hand,
the lovely lady made her way and said
to Statius, as a donna does: ‘Come, too.’

136 If, reader, I’d more space in which to write,
then I should sing in part about that drink,
so sweet I’d never have my ﬁll of it.
139 However, since these pages now are full,
prepared by rights to take the second song,
the reins of art won’t let me pass beyond.
142 I came back from that holiest of waves
remade, refreshed as any new tree is,
renewed, refreshed with foliage anew,
145 pure and prepared to rise towards the stars.

Commedia Cantica 3:
Paradiso

CANTO 1

1* Glory, from Him who moves all things that are,
penetrates the universe and then shines back,
reﬂected more in one part, less elsewhere.
4* High in that sphere which takes from Him most light
I was – I was! – and saw things there that no one who
descends knows how or ever can repeat.
7 For, drawing near to what it most desires,
our intellect so sinks into the deep
no memory can follow it that far.
10 As much, though, truly of that holy realm
as I could keep as treasure in my mind
will now become the substance of my song.
13* O high Apollo, in this ﬁnal work, make me
a vessel of your worth as ﬁne as you
demand, in granting longed-for laurel crowns.
16 So far, one summit of Parnassus’ heights
has been enough. In this arena, though,
the task, as I now enter, calls for both.
19 Enter my heart and breathe in me, as when
you ﬂayed defeated Marsyas, and drew
that satyr and his limbs from sheathing skin.
22 If you can lend me, from your holy power,
enough so I may manifest the shade
of that rejoicing realm which marks my head,
25 then to the foot of your beloved bough
I’ll come and crown myself with victory leaves – as you
and this great theme will ﬁt me to.

28 So seldom (fault and shame of human wills!)
are these leaves, greatest Father, gathered up
to celebrate an emperor or poet.
31 If any, thirsting, freely seeks these fronds
(peneian-branched) there must be, in that joyful deity of
Delphi, joy born anew.
34 A minute spark precedes a towering ﬂame.
Others may be who, after me, will pray
with better voice towards Apollo’s hill.
37* Rising, the beacon of the world will come
to mortal eyes through many estuaries,
but shines where four spheres join three cruciforms 40
with better impetus and better stars,
all in conjunction, and, with its own mark,
more clearly seals and tempers earthly wax.
43 That surge of sun made morning there, dusk here,
and all that hemisphere was almost white
while, equally, this other part was dark,
46 when Beatrice turned, as I saw now,
towards her left and, turning, set her eyes –
no eagle so intent – towards the sun.
49* As any falcon’s searching ﬂight will dive,
then strike back up, or else like reﬂex rays,
which, angled from the ﬁrst, return on high,
52 so, too, her gesture, pouring through my gaze
into imagination, made me turn
and ﬁx my eyes – beyond our norm – straight at the sun.
55 Much is permitted there that here, on earth,
is not permitted to our human powers,
thanks to that place made, properly, our own.
58 I could not bear it long yet did not fail
to see, in that brief time, sparks ﬂy around,
as iron from a ﬁre when brought to boil.
61 Then suddenly it seemed that day and day
were joined, as though – adorned by Him who can – the
skies were lighted by a second sun.

64 Beatrice remained, her eyes ﬁxed wholly
on the eternal wheels. And my bright glance,
turned back from that above, I ﬁxed on her.
67* Held in her look, I, inwardly, was made
what Glaucus, tasting grass, was made to be,
consorting with the other ocean gods.
70 To give (even in Latin phrase) a meaning
to ‘transhuman’ can’t be done. For those whom grace will
grant experience, let my case serve.
73* Whether I was no more than soul (which love,
in governing the spheres, made lastly new),
You know, who raised me up through Your pure light.
76* When that great wheel – which You, desired by that,
make sempiternal – had, with harmonies
proportionate and clear, made me attend,
79 the skies of Heaven, it seemed to me, blazed out
so lit by solar ﬂame no lake on earth,
ﬂooded by rain or river, spread so wide.
82 The newness of the sound and that great light
kindled in me desire to know the cause
sharper than any I have ever felt.
85 And she who saw me as I am, at this,
to bring some calm to my excited mind,
before I asked her, opening her lips,
88 began to speak: ‘With false imaginings
you make yourself so dull you fail to see
what, shaking oﬀ this cloud, you’d see quite well.
91 You are not still on earth as you suppose.
No thunderbolt that ﬂees its proper place
ran at such speed as you return to yours.’
94 If I, by these brief, smiling words of hers,
was disinvested of initial doubt,
then now by new and greater I was caught.
97 ‘I rest content,’ I said, ‘in utmost wonder.
So requievi. Yet I wonder now
how I climb through these light embodiments.’

100 At this, in deep, aﬀectionate concern,
she sighed and set her eyes on me,
as mothers do when silly sons rave on.
103* ‘There is,’ she now began, ‘an ordered ratio
between all things there are. It’s this – such form –
that makes the universe resemble God.
106 The highest creatures see the footprints there
of God’s eternal prowess and his worth,
the end to which (as mentioned here) the rule is made.
109 Within the order I am speaking of,
all things, according to their kind, will veer
towards their origin, some near, some far.
112 Therefore, across the ocean of “to be”,
all natures move towards their diﬀerent ports, each
moved by import of a given drive.
115 One instinct bears the ﬁre towards the moon.
Another moves all death-bound creatures on.
Another grips and uniﬁes the earth.
118 Nor is it only such created things,
beyond intelligence, that this bow sends,
but also those possessed of love and mind.
121* The providence that integrates the whole
makes limpid with its light that heavenly sphere within
which rolls the sphere of greatest speed.
124 It bears us now to our appointed place –
that bowstring with its power to aim aright
whatever it lets ﬂy to happy targets.
127 It’s true, though, just as, often, form will fail
to be attuned to what the art intends,
since matter, being deaf, will not respond,
130 so, too, a creature which can freely bend
will, sometimes, though impelled entirely straight, desert
that course and wander oﬀ elsewhere.
133 As lightning ﬂashes fall from thunder clouds,
so likewise that ﬁrst impetus strikes down,
wrenched wrong by false delight, towards earth.

136 You ought not, if I’m right, be more amazed
at rising up than when you see a stream
descending from a hill’s crest to its base.
139 The wonder would, in your case be, when free
of all impediment, you sat down there –
as though live ﬂames on earth were ever still.’
142 With this, she turned once more to face the sky.

CANTO 2

1 You in that little boat who, listening hard,
have followed, from desire to hear me through,
behind my bowsprit singing on its way,
4 now turn, look back and mark your native shores.
Do not set out upon these open seas
lest losing me you end confused and lost.
7* The waves I ride have never yet been crossed.
Minerva breathes. Apollo leads me on.
The nine bright Muses point the Ursa-stars.
10* You other few who have already stretched,
straight-necked, through time to reach for angel-bread
(the food we live by here, unsatisﬁed)
13 may to good purpose set your vessel out
across the deep salt swell, and plough my wake
before the waters level once again.
16* The Argonauts, in glory, Colchis-bound,
were not so wonder-struck as you will be
when they saw Jason yoked-up to his plough.
19* In-born in being, our perpetual thirst
to reach the deiform domain now bore us on
as rapid, almost, as the spheres you see.
22 Beatrice looked up. I looked at her.
Then maybe in the time an arrow takes
to hit the target, ﬂy and slip the notch,
25 I saw I’d come where something marvellous
tugged me in sight towards itself. So she
(no thought of mine could be concealed from her)

28 turning to me, as happy as lovely,
‘Direct your mind in thanks,’ she said, ‘to God.
For he has made us one with this ﬁrst star.’
31 To me it seemed a cloud now covered us,
shining and solid, dense and burnished clean,
almost as diamond when the sunlight strikes.
34 Into itself the eternal margarite
took us as water will receive a ray
of light, remaining, even so, all one.
37 If I was there in body (we can’t grasp
how one dimension takes another in,
as – body snaked in body – needs must be)
40 that should ignite in us still more desire
to see that being where, as can be seen,
our human nature is at one with God.
43 There we shall see what here we hold in faith,
not argued through but known for what it is,
as is the primal truth that all believe.
46 ‘My lady, as devoutly as I can,
I oﬀer Him all thanks,’ I now replied,
‘since He here parts me from the mortal world.
49* But tell me what those dark signs are that mark
the body of the moon? Down there on earth
some folk are led by these to speak of Cain.’
52 She smiled at this a little. Then she said:
‘If mortals make mistakes in what they think
when sense won’t turn the key of evidence,
55 no dart of wonder ought to pierce you through
when you observe, as now, that rational thought –
which has to follow sense – is weak of wing.
58 But tell me what your thoughts about this are.’
‘That variance,’ I said, ‘so I believe,
results from matter being rare or dense.’
61 ‘Well,’ she replied, ‘you’ll shortly come to see
how deeply out of true your thinking is.
If you’ll attend, I’ll put the counter case.

64 The constellations, wheeling, show you many
lights. And these, as one may easily discern,
present as diﬀerent, both in size and kind.
67* If that were merely caused by “rare” and “dense”
there’d be in all one single power of life,
distributed at par or more or less.
70 But virtues, in diﬀering, have to be the fruits
of diﬀerent formal principles. And these,
if you were right, would all, save one, be lost.
73* Consider, too: if rarity explained
the dark that you have asked about, then either
in part this planet would be starved of stuﬀ,
76 or else, as fat and lean are layered in meat,
so this, throughout its volume and extent,
would change as pages do within a book.
79 Suppose the ﬁrst were true, then this would show
in all eclipses of the sun – as light
shines through, behaving as it does in rarities.
82 It doesn’t. So let’s take your second thought.
And if, maybe, I also prove this void,
then this will give the lie to all you’ve said.
85 If rarity does not extend throughout,
it must at some point terminate as, there,
its opposite prevents its onward path.
88 The second ray returning from that depth
reﬂects like coloured images in glass –
when glass has lead plate hidden at its back.
91 But now, you’ll tell me, solar rays shed gloom
because in certain parts, at these set points,
the light, returning, breaks from further back.
94* Now if you’ll try experiment – from which
the rivers of your knowledge always ﬂow –
from that objection you will free yourself.
97 Take three reﬂective surfaces. Move two
an equal distance oﬀ, the other more,
and set your eye between the former two.

100 Now facing them, arrange, behind your back,
a source of light to kindle all these three
so that it comes struck back to you from each.
103 Although the image in the further glass
is less extensive, you are bound to see
it shines back equal in intensity.
106 When warming sun rays strike a mass of snow,
aqueous valencies will then remain
naked of colour and their former chill.
109 Since you in intellect are like that now,
I want to form in you a light so live,
its shimmering look will tremble to your sight.
112* Circling within the sphere of holy peace,
an astral body turns whose power sustains
the virtual life of all that it contains.
115 The next sphere (where so many stars are seen)
shares out such being into diﬀerent modes,
each one distinct from, and contained in, that.
118 The seven spheres below in diﬀerent ways
dispose the essences each has within
towards their proper telos , seed and aim.
121 These living organs of the world thus go,
as you can see them now, from grade to grade,
receiving from above, forming below.
124 Look closely at the steps I’ll take from here
to reach the truth that you so much desire,
so you’ll know how to cross this on your own.
127 Motion and virtue in these holy gyres
rightly draw breath (as hammer-skill from smith),
in turns deriving from angelic moves.
130 The sphere of stars, so ﬁne with all its lights,
receives from that deep mind which rolls it round
the image that it has, then prints that seal.
133 And as your soul within the dust you are
diﬀuses and resolves through diﬀerent limbs,
adapting thus to various powers of life,

136 so too angelic intellect unfolds
(while turning still round its own unity)
its goodness multiplied through all the stars.
139 So diﬀerent virtue forms a diﬀerent bond
with all those precious bodies that it brings
to life – as life in you its strength is bound.
142 Deriving as it does from happy kind,
the virtue, fused with body, shines throughout,
as joy does in the pupil of the eye.
145 From this there comes – and not from rare or dense –
apparent diﬀerences from light to light.
That is the formal principle that makes
148 (according to its goodness) clear and cloud.’

CANTO 3

1 She – as the sun who ﬁrst in love shone warm
into my heart – had now, by proof and counterproof,
disclosed to me the lovely face of truth.
4 And being ready, as was only right,
to own my errors – and new certainties –
I ﬂung my head back, and I meant to speak.
7 But then, it seemed, a vision came to me
and bound me up so tightly to itself
that these confessions would not come to mind.
10 Compare: from clear and polished panes of glass,
or else from glinting waters, calm and still
(but not so deep their depths are lost in darkness), 13 we
see reﬂections that reveal a hint,
though faint, of our own looks and reach the eye
less strongly than a pearl on some white brow.
16* So I saw many faces, keen to speak,
and ran now to the opposite mistake
from that which ﬁred the love of man and stream.
19 No sooner had I noticed – and supposed
that these were seemings in a looking-glass –
I turned my eyes to see who these might be.
22 I saw there nothing, so returned my glance
straight to the shining-out of my dear guide,
who, smiling at me, blazed in her own look.
25 ‘You baby!’ she said. ‘Don’t worry or wonder,
to see me smile at all these ponderings.
Those feet are not yet steady on the ground of truth.

28 Your mind, from habit, turns round to a void.
And yet those beings that you see are true,
bound here below for vows they disavowed.
31 So speak to them. And hear and trust their words.
The light of truth that feeds them with its peace
will never let their feet be turned awry.’
34* Now turning to the shadow who most yearned,
in love and pure delight, to speak to me,
I said, nearly entranced by eagerness:
37 ‘You spirit, well created in the rays
of this eternity of life, you feel
a sweetness never known, if not by taste.
40 Then let me, in your kindness, hear your name,
and tell me what all here are destined for.’
To which – eyes smiling – she at once replied:
43 ‘We, living in God’s love, can no more lock
our doors against true-minded aims of will
than God’s love does, which wills this court like him.
46 I was a virgin sister in the world.
Search deep in memory. My being now
more beautiful won’t hide me from your eyes.
49 I am Piccarda – as you’ll know I am –
and blessed among the many who are blessed,
within this slowest moving of the spheres.
52 The ﬂames of what we feel are lit in us
by pleasure purely in the Holy Spirit,
dancing for happiness in that design.
55 And though the part allotted us may seem
far down, the reason is that, yes, we did
neglect our vows. These were in some part void.’
58 ‘A wonder shining in the look you have
reveals,’ I said, ‘an I-don’t-know of holiness
that alters you from how you once were seen.
61 So recognition did not speed to mind.
Yet all you say has helped me understand.
Your image speaks precisely to me now.

64 But tell me this: you are so happy here,
have you no wish to gain some higher grade,
to see and be as friends to God still more?’
67 Smiling a moment with the other shades,
she then, in utmost happiness, replied,
blazing, it seemed, in the ﬁrst ﬁres of love:
70* ‘Dear brother, we in will are brought to rest
by power of caritas that makes us will
no more than what we have, nor thirst for more.
73 Were our desire to be more highly placed,
all our desires would then be out of tune
with His, who knows and wills where we should be.
76 Yet discord in these spheres cannot occur –
as you, if you reﬂect on this, will see –
since charity is a priori here.
79 In formal terms, our being in beatitude
entails in-holding to the will of God,
our own wills thus made one with the divine.
82 In us, therefore, there is, throughout this realm,
a placing, rung to rung, delighting all
– our king as well in-willing us in will.
85* In His volition is the peace we have.
That is the sea to which all being moves,
be it what that creates or Nature blends.’
88 Now it was clear. I saw that everywhere
in Paradise there’s Heaven, though grace may rain
in varied measure from the Highest Good.
91 But then, as often happens over food
(though satisﬁed with one, we crave the next,
reaching for that while still we’re saying ‘thanks’), 94 so
now in word and gesture I betrayed
an eagerness to hear from her what weave
her spool had not yet drawn out to the end.
97* ‘Perfect in life, her merits raised on high,
there is a lady – more in-heavened than we –
who wrote, on earth, a Rule of dress and veil,

100 that lets its wearer sleep and wake till death
beside a husband who accepts those vows
that charity conforms to his delight.
103 To follow her, I ﬂed – a girl, no more –
out of the world. I pulled her cowl to me,
and promised my obedience to that Rule.
106 Men now arrived, more set on harm than good.
They dragged me from the cloister I had loved,
and God well knows what then my life became.
109 But, over to my right, there shows to you
another splendour who, enkindled now
with all the light that gathers in our sphere,
112 knows from her own life what I say of mine.
She was our sister. And from her head, too,
was torn the shadow of her pure, white hood.
115* This is the light of Constance, that high queen
who bore to Swabia’s second storm a son,
the third – and ultimate – of that great line.
118 And yet – although against her will, against
all decency – she went back to the world,
she never let the veil fall from her heart.’
121 Those were her words to me. But then ‘Ave
Maria’ began, singing. And, singing,
she went from sight, as weight sinks deep in water.
124 My eyes pursued as far as eyesight can,
but, as I lost her, so I turned once more
to target a desire far greater still.
127 Now all my thoughts were ﬁxed on Beatrice.
But she, as lightning strikes, so stunned my gaze,
my eyes at ﬁrst could not support the sight,
130 and this was why my question came so slow.

CANTO 4

1* Between two equidistant portions, equally
moving, if free to choose, you’d starve to death
before you’d carried either to your teeth.
4 So, too, some lamb might stand between the bite
of hungry wolves, fearing them both alike.
So, too, a hound would stand between two does.
7 If, therefore, I kept silence now, I neither
criticize nor praise myself. Driven by doubts
of equal measure, this was necessity.
10 I still kept silent. Yet my keen desire
was painted – and my questions, too – within my eyes,
warmer by far than well-formed words could speak.
13* So Beatrice did as Daniel did
to free Nebuchadnezzar from the rage
that made him cruel beyond all rational need.
16 ‘I clearly see,’ she said, ‘how two desires
fret you as you take aim. Your own concerns
constrain themselves. You cannot breathe them out.
19 Your thinking runs: “If will-to-good endures,
how, then, can violence wrought by other hands
reduce in me the measure of desert?”
22* A further reason for your doubt is this:
our souls return, or so it may appear,
as Plato in his teaching says, to stars.
25 These are the questions that, with equal weight,
point, in volition, hard upon your mind.
I’ll ﬁrst treat that which is more poisonous.

28* The most in-god-ed of the Seraphim,
Moses and Samuel – and either John
you care to mention – even Maria,
31 none is enthroned in any other sphere
than those souls are who’ve just appeared to you.
Nor are their years, existing, more or less.
34* All add in beauty to the highest gyre.
Some sense the eternal breathing more, some less.
So life is sweet to all in diﬀering ways.
37 They did, here, show themselves, but not because
this sphere has been allotted them as theirs.
They signify celestial power least raised.
40 To speak in this way ﬁts the human mind.
For you can only grasp through things you’ve sensed what
mind will then present as ﬁt for thought.
43 For this same reason, Scripture condescends
to your capacities, and says that God
has hands and feet – though meaning otherwise.
46 So, Holy Church will also represent
Michael and Gabriel with human face,
the other, too, who helped heal Tobit’s sight.
49 But Plato in Timaeus “On the soul”
argues a case at odds with that seen here.
For what he says, it seems, has literal force.
52 He says that souls go back to their own stars,
believing them to be excised from these,
when Nature granted each its proper form.
55 This doctrine, though, perhaps conceals a sense
quite other than these words of his pronounce,
with implications we should not deride.
58 If Plato means that, back to join these wheels,
there comes the blame or honour of their power,
perhaps his bow shot hits upon some truth.
61 And yet, misunderstood, this principle
wrenched almost all the world oﬀ course. So Jove and
Mars and Mercury were named as gods.

64* The other doubt, so troubling you, is not
as venomous. The injury it does
can’t lead you elsewhere and away from me.
67 That justice in our realm, to mortal eyes,
should seem unjust concerns you in regard
to faith. It’s not some vicious heresy.
70 But since you have the subtlety of mind
yourself to penetrate the truth of this,
I shall, since you desire it, tell you all.
73 If “violence” is done when those who’re harmed
bring nothing of their own to outside force,
these souls, though blessèd, aren’t exempt from blame.
76 Free will, unless it wills, cannot be quenched
but acts like Nature in a rising ﬂame
even though torn by force a thousand times.
79 But if it bends – whatever the degree –
it follows force. These women, though they could
have ﬂed to holy ground, did bend like this.
82 Had they, in what they willed, stood absolute,
as did Saint Lawrence on the burning coals,
or Mucius – harsh towards his own right hand –
85 their wills would then have thrust them, once released,
back on the road from which they’d just been drawn.
But will as ﬁrm as that is very rare.
88 These words (suppose you’ve listened as you ought)
will leave the case regarding what is just
– which often would have irked you – null and void.
91 Yet now, across the path before your eyes,
appears another obstacle. And you yourself –
you’d quickly tire – could not get free from this.
94 I’ve ﬁxed within your mind this certainty:
that souls in Paradise can never lie.
They all are, always, close to primal truth.
97 But then you might have heard Piccarda say
that Constance kept her heart set on the veil,
And so, it seems, she contradicts me here.

100 It has, my dearest brother, often been
that things, in ﬂeeing danger, have been done,
counter to choice, that were not right to do,
103* as when, responding to his father’s prayer,
Alcmaeon slew his mother for revenge,
and, not to fail in piety, proved pitiless.
106 I want you, in such cases, to be clear
that will conjoins with violence. And so,
for these oﬀences there is no excuse.
109 Will does not, in the absolute, consent to harm.
It does consent, however, in degrees of fear,
lest, drawing back, it falls to more distress.
112 So when Piccarda makes the point she does,
she means the will as absolute while I
intend the other. We, as one, speak truth.’
115 These waves came ﬂooding from that holy stream
that rises at the source of every truth.
As such, they set my two desires to rest.
118 ‘Goddess, belovèd of the loving First!
Your words in waves,’ I said, ‘ﬂow into me.
They warm me through, and light me more and more.
121 No feeling I possess is deep enough
to make return to you, in grace for grace.
But He who sees – and can – will answer so.
124 I see full well that human intellect
can never be content unless that truth
beyond which no truth soars shines down on it.
127 When once they come to it, as come they may,
minds couch in truth as beasts do in their lairs.
Were that not so, then all desire would fail.
130 Born of that will, there rise up, like fresh shoots,
pure doubts. These ﬂourish at the foot of truth.
From height to height, they drive us to the peak.
133 This beckons me. This makes me very sure
that I, my lady, may in reverence seek
another truth that still is dark to me.

136 I want to know if we can make amends
with other goods when vows go unfulﬁlled,
so these will not seem meagre in your scale.’
139 Now Beatrice looked at me with eyes all full
of sparks of speaking love, and so divine
that, overwhelmed, I turned my back on her
142 and, eyes bowed down, I almost lost myself.

CANTO 5

1 ‘If I ﬂame out in warmth of love to you
beyond all measure that is seen on earth,
and so defeat the prowess of your eyes,
4 don’t wonder why. This light in me proceeds
from perfect sight, which, once it apprehends
the good, will dance on, apprehending that.
7 Already I see well in your own mind
the mirrored splendour of eternal light
which seen will kindle – only, always – love.
10 And if your love is teased to other things,
then these are nothing but the merest trace,
ill understood, of that light shining through.
13 You wish to know if, when a vow falls short,
some other service might be rendered up
to keep that soul secure from legal charge.’
16 So Beatrice’s song began this canto,
and then, as one who makes no break in speech,
continued in the sacred process thus:
19* ‘The greatest gift that God, in spacious deed,
made, all-creating – and most nearly formed
to His liberality, most prized by Him –
22 was liberty in actions of the will,
with which all creatures of intelligence –
and they alone – both were and are endowed.
25 Now there’ll appear, if you pursue this thought,
the value and nobility of vows,
when framed so God’s consent consents with yours.

28 For in a pact conﬁrmed by God and man
the treasured gift I speak of is itself
made sacriﬁce, made thus by its own act.
31 And so what restitution can there be?
You think you’ll make good use of what you gave?
Well, that’s to try good works with stolen cash.
34 So now you’re certain of the major point.
But since our Holy Church can loose a vow –
which seems quite counter to the truth I’ve told – 37 you’ll
need to sit a while more at this feast.
The meat that you have taken on is tough.
It needs some help if you’re to get it down.
40 Open your mind to what I’ll now declare
and grasp it inwardly. To understand
won’t count as knowledge if it’s not retained.
43 Essential in a sacriﬁcial vow
are two considerations: what we’ll do ,
then, formally, the fact that we agree.
46 Per se , agreements, save when carried through,
cannot be nulliﬁed. And that, above,
was what, precisely, was made clear to you.
49* The Hebrews of necessity were thus
required to make appropriate oﬀerings,
though some, as you should know, were modiﬁed.
52 The second aspect (“substance”, as deﬁned)
may properly be varied, so no blame
attaches in the change to other things.
55 Do not, though, shift the burden from your back
by any mere decision of your own.
A priest must turn both white and yellow keys.
58 All changes – please believe – are idiotic
unless the principle and substitute
stand in a ratio of four to six.
61 When ﬁrst vows, therefore, are of so much weight
that they, in value, twist the scales awry,
one cannot quit the charge by substitutes.

64* So mortals should not take facetious oaths.
Be faithful. But in being so, don’t squint –
like Jephthah, pledging his “good day” to death.
67 Better for him if he had said: “I’m wrong,”
than do worse doing it. Stupid as well,
the chieftain of the Greeks, as you can see.
70 For him, in sacriﬁce, Iphigenia rinsed
her lovely face in tears, and caused to weep
both foolish men and wise at such observances.
73 Christians, be weightier in moving vows.
Don’t ﬂutter on every breeze like feathers.
And don’t suppose that every vow will cleanse.
76 You have the Testaments, both Old and New,
a shepherd in the Church to be your guide.
That is enough for your salvation here.
79* If wrongful appetites yell otherwise,
you are still human, not such brain-dead sheep
as make the Jews among you laugh aloud.
82 Don’t imitate those silly, wayward lambs
who wander from their mother’s milk, and ﬁght
only against themselves for sheer delight.’
85 So Beatrice (as I write) to me.
And then she, all desiring, turned once more
to where the universe shines liveliest.
88 Her saying nothing now and changing look
imposed a silence on my avid mind,
which had already new demands ahead.
91 And so, as when some arrow hits its mark
before the string that shot it comes to rest,
we ran on swiftly to the second realm.
94 And here, on entering that heavenly light,
I, on the instant, saw in her such joy
the star itself at that shone brighter still.
97 And if the planet changed its form and laughed,
then what of me, being, as mortals are,
so prone in every way to transmutation.

100 Compare: in ﬁsh pools that are still and clear,
the ﬁsh are drawn – as though they guess at food – to
anything that comes there from outside.
103 So now I saw a thousand splendours plus
drawing towards us. And in each was heard:
‘Look there! He’ll make our many loves grow more.’
106 And then, as each came near to us, each shade
was seen – within the ﬂash of clarity
that came from each – full of pure happiness.
109 Readers, just think if what we’ve now begun
did not go on, what torment it would be
to hunger, wanting further information.
112 Imagine that, and then you, too, will see
my great desire, when these came to my eyes,
to hear from them what their conditions were.
115 ‘O you, born well! To you is granted grace
to see the thrones of triumph in eternity
before your soldiership on earth is done.
118 The ray that soars through all these heavenly skies
sets us ablaze. And so, if you desire
clear words concerning us, please take your ﬁll.’
121* These words were uttered by one holy soul.
From Beatrice: ‘Speak! Just get it said.
Be conﬁdent. Believe them as though gods.’
124 ‘You make your nest, as I can see, within
a light that, drawn from your own eyes,
is yours alone. It glitters as you smile.
127 But still I do not know, you honoured soul,
who you all are, why ranked in Mercury,
the sphere that sun rays veil from mortal eyes.’
130 I spoke directly to that source of light,
the ﬁrst to speak to me. And this itself now shone with far
more brilliance than it did before.
133 Compare: the sun, when heat has worn away
the tempering inﬂuence of a vapour cloud,
conceals itself in overwhelming light.

136 So now, in greater joy, that holy form
hid himself from me in his own bright ray
and, thus enclosed, enclosed he spoke to me
139 to chant the chant the following canto sings.

CANTO 6

1* ‘Since Constantine ﬁrst turned the Eagle’s ﬂight
against the path, east–west, that Heaven’s course takes,
(once followed by the Patriarch who chose, as wife, 4
Lavinia) a hundred years and then a hundred more,
God’s bird had kept to Europe’s farthest bounds,
close by the mountains of its origin.
7 Under the shadow of its sacred plumes,
from hand to hand it governed all the world,
and came by due succession into mine.
10 I, emperor once, am now Justinian.
And by the will of primal love – which I know here – I
purged our laws of emptiness and dross.
13* Before I set my mind upon this work,
I’d thought of Christ as single and divine –
not truly man – contented in that faith.
16 But then the blessed Agapetus – shepherd
supreme – led me, by words of his, aright,
to ﬁnd pure faith, unsullied and complete.
19 I trusted him, believed him, and now see
what he in faith upheld – as clear as you,
by logic, prove one thought is false, one true.
22 As soon as I walked onward with the Church,
then God so pleased, through grace, to breathe in me the
great design on which I set all thought.
25 My troops I gave in trust to Belisarius
and Heaven’s right hand allied itself with his.
These triumphs were a sign to settle thus.

28 This answer punctuates your ﬁrst demand.
But, even so, these words imply much more.
I’m therefore bound to add a further note,
31* so you can see how right those are (Oh yes!
So right!) to move against that holiest of signs,
to challenge it or claim it as their own.
34 Look at its powers! These make all reverence due,
these virtues that were born in that same hour
when, dying, Pallas gained the Sign its realm.
37 The Eagle dwelt in Alba (as you’ll know)
three hundred years or more until, at last,
Three fought with three, to win that Sign for Rome.
40 You also know what deeds, through seven reigns,
the great sign wrought (the Sabine wound,
Lucretia’s grief), defeating tribes around.
43 You know its exploits, borne by Roman pride,
against the Brenner Gaul and Pyrrhus, too,
against all other princedoms, states or guilds.
46 Torquatus, Quintus (known, for unkempt hair,
as “Tousel-head”), the Decii and Fabians,
all these won fame which here I gladly laud.
49 The Eagle, too, laid low the Arab boast
that passed, in steps that followed Hannibal,
the alpine cliﬀs from which, great Po, you glide.
52 Beneath that Sign, young Scipio won his crown,
young Pompey, too. And bitter it appeared
to that great hill beneath which you were born.
55 Then near the time when all the heavens willed
to lead the world back to serenity,
Caesar, by will of Rome, took up the Sign.
58 And then Isère and Loire and Seine beheld,
from Var to Rhine, what that could do – and all
those streaming valleys that supply the Rhône.
61 And then it left Ravenna and achieved,
leaping the Rubicon, such things in ﬂight
that neither tongue nor pen could seek to trace.

64 Next, towards Spain it swung its warrior might,
then to Durazzo in Albania.
It struck Farsalia. And hot Nile felt the pain.
67 Atandros, then, and Simois (whence it sprang)
it saw once more, and Hector’s resting place.
And then to Ptolemy’s harm it shook its wings,
70 then fell on Juba, ﬂashing thunder bolts.
From there it turned towards your western realms
and heard Pompean trumpets sounding there.
73 For all it bore through its next stewardship,
Brutus in Hell and Cassius both bark.
And Modena – Perugia, too – once grieved for that.
76 Sad Cleopatra also weeps for it.
By snake bite, ﬂeeing as that Sign advanced,
she met her sudden and atrocious death.
79 Then, carried in Augustus’ hand, it ran
towards the Red Sea coast and brought such peace
to all the world that Janus’s shrine was locked.
82 Yet everything that Sign (which moves my speech)
had done till now, or then went on to do,
throughout the mortal realm that lies in thrall,
85 is seemingly but little and obscure
if now, clear-sightedly, with heart made pure,
you look in wonder at Tiberius’ hands.
88 For, to the hands of that third emperor,
the Living Justice that inspires me now
granted the glory to avenge His ire.
91 Now look in wonder at my counter charge:
the Sign then ran, in Titus’s reign, to take
due vengeance for the ancient sin avenged.
94 And when the godless teeth of Lombard hordes
bit deep in Holy Church, then Charlemagne,
victorious beneath its wings, brought aid.
97 You can now pass a judgement on all those,
with all their faults, whom I accused above,
the cause of all the ills that fall on you.

100 Some set, against that universal Sign,
their tinsel lilies, while the rest will claim
the Sign’s their own. Hard, this: who’s more to blame?
103 Let them go on, the Ghibellines, and ply
their craft beneath some other sign than this.
All, prising it from justice, serve it ill.
106 Nor let the Guelfs of upstart Charles Anjou
assail that Sign but rather fear those claws
that ripped the hide from prouder whelps than these.
109 Children, as often happens, rue in tears
the crimes their fathers did. Don’t think that God will
change his lawful arms to lily ﬂowers.
112 This little star is ﬁnely ﬁtted out
with souls who, noble in their deeds, still sought that fame
and honour should live after them.
115 But when desires incline to aim at that,
the rays of truthful love – thus wandering oﬀ –
must needs incline, above, to lesser life.
118 To calculate the balance, though, between
reward and merit is a part, for us,
of happiness, seeing there’s neither more nor less.
121 Thus Living Justice sweetly shapes and ﬁts
a longing for the good within our hearts,
so this cannot be wrenched to any wrong.
124 As, diﬀering, voices sing a sweet-tuned chord,
so, too, in our life here, from diﬀering thrones, sweet
harmonies are sent through all these wheels.
127* And here, within this pearl that ﬂowers for you,
there shines the shining light of Romeo,
whose deeds, so ﬁne and good, were ill-received.
130 Those lords, though, of Provence, opposed to him,
well, they’ve no cause. They’ll come to grief,
taking amiss another’s virtuous deeds.
133 Four daughters had he, Raymond Berengar.
Each was a queen. And everything was done
by Romeo, that strange and humble traveller.

136 Then slanderous tongues led Raymond to demand
a full account of this most honest man,
who’d paid him back for ten at seven plus ﬁve.
139 So, destitute and aged, he left that shore.
But if the world had only known his heart,
begging his life away from crust to crust,

CANTO 7

1* ‘Osanna, sanctus Deus sabaòth ,
superillustrans claritate tua
felices ignes horum malacòth!’
4 Thus – circling on himself, to his own tune –
was seen by me the singing of that ens ,
a double light as two-ing over him.
7 Into their dance they moved, this light and all.
And then with utter speed, like sparks of ﬁre,
they veiled themselves from me in sudden distance.
10* I, still in doubt, was saying: ‘Tell her! Tell her!’
within myself still saying: ‘Tell my lady!
Her words drop sweet and take my thirst away.’
13 Yet awe of her – its power en-ladying
the whole of me, hearing no more than ‘Be—’ or ‘—ice’ –
kept me, as though some drowsy soul, head down.
16 She did not suﬀer me to be so long,
but now began, arraying round me there
a smile to make men happy in Hell’s ﬁre:
19* ‘As I, to look at you, can tell unerringly,
a doubt has ﬁxed in you: how vengeance might,
in justice, fall on vengeance justly wrought?
22 But I shall quickly free your mind from knots.
Attend to me. The words I am to speak
will bring you doctrine of the greatest weight.
25 Because the unborn ﬁrst of men would bear
no curb, for his own good, on power of will,
damning himself, he damned all born to him.

28 The human race, because of this, lay sick –
great error deepening down the centuries –
until it pleased the Logos to descend
31 to where our nature, long abandoning
its maker, was made one, as person , with Him,
by action solely of eternal love.
34 Now ﬁx your eye on what we’re now to say.
This nature, with its maker once at one,
once was, without addition, pure and good,
37 but then was banished of its own accord
from Paradise. For, of itself, it turned aside
from its own life, from truth – its proper road.
40 The sentence, therefore, that the Cross imposed,
if measured by the nature thus assumed,
was just and true. No pain was ever more.
43 Conversely, none, unjustly, did such harm,
considering what person bore the pain,
conjoined within a nature such as that.
46 Thus from the self-same act ﬂowed diﬀerent things.
One death delighted both the Jews and God.
At this earth trembled, Heaven opened wide.
49 You should not, therefore, ﬁnd it hard to see
why vengeance, in itself completely just,
was then avenged by action of just court.
52 But now once more I see that mind of yours
is knotted up, and snags from thought to thought.
You wait in great desire to be set loose.
55 “I understand,” you say, “what I have heard.
But this to me is hidden still, why God
for our redemption willed this way alone?”
58 That ordinance, dear brother, lies entombed,
unseen by anyone whose mind, as yet,
is immature, untempered by love’s ﬂame.
61 For all that – since so many aim at this,
yet very few are clear about their mark –
I’ll tell you why that way was right and ﬁnest.

64 The generosity of God which scorns
all spite and meanness burns within itself,
yet, ﬂaring out, unfolds eternal beauties.
67 Whatever – without second cause – distils
directly from the source of good can have
no end. Stamped thus by good, the print won’t move.
70 Whatever – without a second cause – rains down
from good is wholly free, and does not lie
subjected to the power of things new-made.
73 Conformed to good, it pleases good the more.
That holy ﬁre, whose rays strike everything,
lives brightest in what most resembles it.
76 The human creature thrives, endowed with all
these gifts and beneﬁts. But if one fails
it must be that its dignity will fall.
79 And sin alone deprives it of its freedoms
by rendering it unlike the highest good,
so that it whitens little in that gleam.
82 Nor can it ever regain dignity
without replenishing what guilt makes vain,
with just amends to match its false delight.
85 Your nature in its seed sinned totally ,
and so from all these honours was removed –
as was it also out of Paradise.
88 Nor could these honours ever be restored
unless – if you will note this subtlety –
it made its way through one of these two fords:
91 either that God, in all his courteous grace,
should freely pardon us, or man himself
should oﬀer satisfaction for such madness.
94 Now point your penetrating eye within
the chasm of eternal Mind, and ﬁx
on what I say as tightly as you can.
97 Mankind could not, within its natural bounds,
give satisfaction, ever; none could fall,
obedient in humility, as far

100 as, disobeying, it had sought to rise.
That is the reason why the way was closed
for man to oﬀer proper satisfaction.
103 So this was right: that God by His own means
should bring us back to fullness in our lives,
by one way or – I’d say – by both at once.
106 But since an act will please the agent more
the more it represents to view the heart
of generosity from which it ﬂowed,
109 so, too, that holy generosity
which stamps the universe chose happily
in all His ways to raise you up once more.
112 Between the last great night and ﬁrst of days
there’s never been nor shall be, either way,
a process soaring, so magniﬁcent.
115 For God, in giving of Himself to make
humanity suﬃcient to restore itself,
gave more than, granting pardon, He’d have done.
118 All other means, in justice, would have come
far short, had not the very Son of God
bowed humbly down to take on human ﬂesh.
121 So now to make you see as I do here
and bring to their fulﬁlment your desires,
go back and clarify a certain point.
124* “I see,” you’ll say, “the waters. And I see
ﬁre, air and earth and all their compounds fail, come to
decay and last no time at all.
127 Yet these were creatures in creation, too.
And so, if what you’ve told me is the truth,
these likewise should be safe from gross decay.”
130 The angels, and this pure place where you are,
rightly are known, dear brother, as “created” –
their being formed complete as they are now.
133* But all those elements that you have named,
and everything that might be made from them,
are formed as such by some created power.

136 Matter, which they possess, was thus “created”,
“Created”, too, the power informing them,
descending from the stars that circle round.
139 As mere “complected” possibility,
the very souls of beasts and growing things
draw light and motion from the sacred stars.
142 But your life – through no second cause – is breathed
by Highest Goodness which then brings that life
to love such good and always long for it.
145 And from this principle you may infer
the resurrection you yourselves will have.
Return and think how human ﬂesh was made
148 when our ﬁrst parents were themselves made live.’

CANTO 8

1* The world, while still in danger, once believed
that Venus (lovely Cyprian), whirling
through Epicyclon Three, rayed down mad love,
4 so that, in age-old error, folk of old
did her all honour. And not her alone.
In sacriﬁce and cries of supplication,
7 they, for her sake, would honour Dione
(mother to her), and Cupid, too (her son,
who sat, their stories said, in Dido’s lap).
10 From her – as I now pluck my opening line –
they took her name, and gave it to the star
whose love-looks at the sun touch nape then brow.
13 I had no sense of rising there. And yet
my faith at being now within, she made
quite sure: I saw my lady lovelier.
16 As ﬁre-ﬂecks in a ﬂame can still be seen,
as voices voiced in chorus sound distinct
when one, while others vary, holds its note,
19 so in that light I now saw torches lit
that ran in moving spirals – quick, less quick,
according, I suppose, to inward sight.
22* From chill-compacted clouds no wind – unseen
or seen – has ever shot so swiftly down
as not to seem arrested, loaded, slow,
25 to anyone who’d seen these holy lights
(as they came up to us) who left the gyre
that starts among the highest Seraphim.

28 And deep in those who earliest appeared
there sounded an ‘Hosanna’, so, then on,
I lacked no urge to hear it once again.
31* Then one of these, approaching closer still,
began, alone: ‘We all are quick to hear
what you might please, so you’ll delight in us.
34 We turn at one with royal celestial lords,
one single spire, one spiralling, one thirst.
You, in the world, addressed those angels thus:
37 “O you whose intellection moves Sphere Three …”
We, being full of love, are no less pleased
to rest a while, to please you, than to move.’
40 Towards my lady, ﬁrst, in reverence
I bowed my eyes and, once she’d granted them
agreement and assurance of herself,
43 I turned again towards that source of light
which had, before, made promise of so much,
my voice impressed with longing warmth: ‘Who are you?’
46 How, with new happiness, in strength and kind,
that light, when I addressed it, now increased,
adding more happiness to what it had!
49 So, altered now, he said to me: ‘The world
held me, down there, no time at all. Had that
been more, much ill to come would not have been.
52 My happiness conceals me from you still.
Its rays shine round me, and they keep me hid,
as though some creature swathed in its own silk.
55* You loved me well – and with good reason, too.
For were I still down there, I would have shown
far more of how I love you than leaf-green.
58* The leftward bank rinsed clean by ﬂowing Rhône
(before that river mingles with the Sorgue)
awaited me, my hour now come, as lord,
61* so, too, the Ausonian Horn (its fortresses
are Bari, Croton and Gaeta) stretched
between where Tronto and Verde reach the sea.

64* There gleamed already on my brows the crown
of regions that the Danube irrigates –
when once it leaves behind its German shores.
67 Trinacria (lovely Sicily) where fumes
of sulphur, born from Etna’s core – so not
breathed out by giant Typhoeus – form
70 in that gulf, whipped up by Eurus gusts,
between the capes Pachynus and Peloras,
would still have looked for princes born as heirs, 73
through me, to Charles and Rudolph, had misrule –
which chafes upon a subject race – not stirred
Palermo’s scream: “Death to them French. Death! Death!”
76 And would my brother only look ahead,
he’d learn to ﬂee the tight-wad neediness
of Catalonian ministers and not get hurt.
79 For he – or someone – ought to take that view,
lest loading up his now well-laden ship,
his cargo of extortion prove too great.
82 His temperament, the mean descendant
of a generous race, has need of oﬃcers
who do not strive to line their treasure chests.’
85 ‘Because, my lord, the soaring happiness
your words pour into me is seen, I think,
by you, where all that’s good begins and ends,
88 as clearly as I see it in myself,
it’s yet more welcome, and I prize it well,
since you behold it gazing back to God.
91 You’ve made me light of heart. Now make me clear,
since, speaking, you have brought this doubt to me: how
can it be that sweet seed leads to sour?’
94 So I to him. He in reply: ‘If only
I can show you truth, you’ll hold your eyes
to what you ask where now your shoulders are.
97* The Good, which turns the whole domain you climb
and brings it joy, forms from its providence
the power that works in all these cosmic limbs.

100 Nor is the way things are alone foreseen
within that mind, which of itself is whole,
but equally how each thing best may thrive.
103 And so, whatever bolt this bow may shoot
will arc down, shaped towards an end foreseen,
as things do when directed to their mark.
106 Were this not so, the spheres you journey through
would bring all their eﬀects about in ways
that count as chaos, not as skill or art.
109 And that can’t be – unless the angel-minds
that move these stars were failing in their acts – the ﬁrst
as well, for not perfecting them.
112 This truth – you’d have me make it shine still more?’
I: ‘Not at all. It is, I see, impossible
that Nature, at that need, should ever tire.’
115* So he once more: ‘For those who live on earth,
would it be worse if they weren’t citizens?’
‘Yes,’ I replied. ‘And here I don’t ask why.’
118 ‘And could it be that men should live down there
except by diﬀerence in their diﬀerent tasks?
By no means – if your teacher writes the truth.’
121 He’d reached this point by formal argument,
and then, concluding: ‘It must therefore be
that there are diﬀering roots for what you do.
124* So one is born as Xerxes, one as Solon.
One is Melchizedek, another still
the craftsman, borne on air, who lost his son.
127 All-circling Nature who imprints the stamp
on mortal wax performs her function well,
and won’t distinguish hostels high and low.
130* So Esau happens, by his astral seed,
to diﬀer from his twin, while Romulus
was born so low that Mars was made his sire.
133 The course of generated things would run
unchanged in nature from their generants,
if not defeated by God’s providence.

136 Now that which lay behind you stands ahead.
But so you’ll know your joyous use to me,
I’d have you robed in this corollary:
139 like any seed not sown in native soil,
Nature, on ﬁnding fortune out of tune,
will always give poor proof of what it is.
142 And if the earthly world would set its mind
to fundamentals set by Nature’s hand,
pursuing these, you’d make a happy end.
145* But you will twist to some religious role
a man who’s born to buckle on the sword,
and make a king of someone who should preach.
148 And so your track goes wholly from the road.’

CANTO 9

1* Lovely Clemenza, your dearest Carlo –
once having made that clear to me – went on
to tell the treacheries his seed would face,
4 but said: ‘Be silent. Let the years move by.’
So there is nothing I can say, save this,
that grief deservedly will follow harm.
7 The heart, already, of that holy light
had turned to meet the sun that ﬁlled it full,
the Good that is the All of all that is.
10 You self-deceiving souls! Mere things-gone-wrong!
Twisting your hearts away from that true good,
you strain your brows direct to nothingness.
13* Look now! Another of those splendours came
making towards me there, and signiﬁed,
in ﬂares of brightness, it would do my will.
16 The eyes of Beatrice, ﬁrm on me
as earlier, conﬁrmed me in desire,
giving beloved assurance as before.
19 So, longingly, I said: ‘You happy soul!
Quickly, in answer, balance what I will.
Prove that in you I can reﬂect my thought.’
22 At which the light, still new before my eyes,
out of those depths from which it ﬁrst had sung,
went on as though rejoicing in good deeds.
25 ‘In that degenerate, that evil part
of Italy that lies between Rialto
and the fountain-springs of Piave and Brent,

28 a hill starts up – though not to any height –
from which there once came down a burning brand
who ravaged all the countryside around.
31 From one same root, this torch and I were born.
Cunizza was my name, and I blaze here
because the light of Venus vanquished me.
34 But gladly I myself forgive myself
that inﬂuence. It does not brood on me –
which will, to humdrum minds of yours, seem hard.
37 Of this deep gleaming jewel that, nearest me,
rejoices in our heavenly sky, great fame
remains, nor will it die on earth until
40 the full en-ﬁving of this hundredth year.
You see, then? Shouldn’t men seek excellence,
bequeathing from their ﬁrst a second life?
43 The present crowd, well, they don’t think of that,
shut up between the Adige and Tagliament,
who even when they’re beaten don’t repent.
46* But Padua, whose folk so bitterly
resist what’s right, will see its marshes change
as, soon, the streams that bathe Vicenza blush.
49* And where the Sile and the Cagnan join,
a lord, his head held high, struts brashly on.
The web is stretched already for his ambush.
52 Feltre will soon bewail the treacherous fault
of its own bishop whose oﬀence stinks more
than crimes that land you in a slimy Clink.
55 The tub you’d need for Ferrarese blood
would have to be, in size, an extra-big,
and if you syphon it by drops, you’ll ﬂag.
58 It’s all that bishop’s gift – and how polite! –
to prove so well his Guelf allegiances.
Such gifts will suit how people there all live.
61* Above are mirrors – you will call them Thrones –
where God, in judging all, shines back to us,
so that my bitter words are signs of good.’

64 She now fell silent, and the look she gave
suggested that her thoughts had passed elsewhere,
returning to the wheel where she’d been ﬁrst.
67 That second happiness – of which, by now,
I knew the price – came on, to meet my sight,
like some ﬁne ruby that the sun’s rays pierce.
70 As laughter here breeds laughter, there above
sheer happiness shoots brilliant ﬂares. Below,
a darkening shadow marks the saddened mind.
73 ‘God sees,’ I said, ‘all things, and your own sight,
you happy souls, in-hims itself in him
so no desire can steal away from you.
76* Why, then, does not your voice (which so delights
these spheres with that same song from holy ﬁres
who make themselves a hood of six great wings)
79 bring my desires the satisfaction due?
If I in-you-ed myself as you in-me,
I would not still await what you might ask.’
82* ‘The greatest ocean-trench that water ﬁlls’
– in this way he began his words to me –
‘except that sea which garlands all dry land,
85 travels so far between opposing shores,
against the sun, that where the horizon
at ﬁrst had been it makes its meridian.
88* I dwelt once on the shores of that great lake
between the Ebro and the Magra – whose stream
brieﬂy divides the Genoan and Tuscan realms.
91 Almost at one same point of dawn and dusk
sit both Boughia and the place I was,
which made its harbour warm with its own gore.
94 Folco they called me, those who knew my name.
This heaven now bears my imprint, as once I,
on earth, beneath its inﬂuence, carried its.
97 For Dido – Belus’s daughter – in her love,
harming Creusa and Sichaeus too,
never burned more than I when young, untonsured.

100* Nor did the Rhodopeian girl, so tricked
by her Demophoon, nor did Alcides –
heart around Iole so closely locked.
103 Yet here we don’t repent such things. We smile,
not, though, at sin – we don’t think back to that – but at
that Might that governs and provides.
106 In wonder, we here prize the art to which
His power brings beauty, and discern the good
through which the world above turns all below.
109 But so that you should take back satisﬁed
the doubts this sphere has bred within your will,
I need to make my way still further on.
112* You wish to know who shines within that lamp
here close against my side and scintillates
as sun rays in the purest waters do.
115 Then understand that Rahab in these depths
grows bright with peace. And she, at one with us,
has set the highest seal upon our ranks.
118* She to this heaven, where earth’s shadow points,
was lifted up before all other souls,
drawn there by Christ in his triumphal march.
121 This much was right, for Rahab to be set
in some such heaven as a martyr’s palm,
to mark the victory won by Christ’s two palms.
124 She looked with favour on that proud assault
of Joshua as victor in the Holy Land –
a place that hardly stirs the papal conscience.
127* That town of yours, a thriving weed that he,
the ﬁrst of all to shun his own creator,
has planted there (his meanness stirs complaint)
130 breeds and distributes that accursèd ﬂower
that, since the shepherd has become a wolf,
leads from their proper path both sheep and lambs.
133* The Gospels and the teachers of the Church
are, for sheer greed, abandoned. Decretals
(their margins show as much) are all one reads.

136 The pope and cardinals are set on that.
Their thoughts will never turn to Nazareth,
where Gabriel once opened angel wings.
139* The Vatican and other parts of Rome
which, chosen well, have been the burial ground
for all who followed Peter as his troop
142 shall soon be free of this adultery.’

CANTO 10

1 Looking within his Son through that same Love
that Each breathes out eternally with Each,
the ﬁrst and three-fold Worth, beyond all words, 4 formed
all that spins through intellect or space
in such clear order it can never be,
that we, in wonder, fail to taste Him there.
7* Lift up your eyes, then, reader, and, along with
me, look to those wheels, directed to that part
where motions – yearly and diurnal – clash.
10 And there, entranced, begin to view the skill
the Master demonstrates. Within Himself,
He loves it so, His looking never leaves.
13 Look! Where those orbits meet, there branches oﬀ
the slanting circles that the planets ride
to feed and ﬁll the world that calls on them.
16 And were the path it takes not twisted so,
then many astral virtues would be wasted,
and almost all potential, down here, dead.
19 And were the distance any more or less
from that straight course, then much – above and here –
so ordered in the world, would be a void.
22 Now, reader, sit there at your lecture bench.
And, if you want not tedium but joy,
continue thinking of the sip you’ve had.
25 I’ve laid it out. Now feed on it yourself.
The theme of which I’m made to be scribe
drags in its own direction all my thoughts.

28* The greatest minister of natural life
who prints the worth of Heaven on the world,
and measures time for us in shining light,
31 conjoined with Aries (as we’ve called to mind),
was spinning through those spirals where, each hour, its
presence is revealed to us the sooner.
34 And with him I was there, but no more knew
of making that ascent than anyone
will know a thought before it ﬁrst appears.
37 It’s she – Beatrice – who sees the way,
from good to better still, so suddenly
her actions aren’t stretched out in passing time.
40 How brilliant they must all, themselves, have been
seen in the sun where I now came to be,
not in mere hue but showing forth pure light.
43 Call as I might on training, art or wit,
no words of mine could make the image seen.
Belief, though, may conceive it, eyes still long.
46 In us, imagination is too mean
for such great heights. And that’s no miracle.
For no eye ever went beyond the sun.
49 So shining there was that fourth family
that’s always fed by one exalted Sire
with sight of what He breathes, what Son He has.
52 And now, ‘Give thanks,’ Beatrice began.
‘Give thanks to the Him, the Sun of all the angels.
In grace, He’s raised you to this sun of sense.’
55 No mortal heart was ever so well fed
to give itself devoutly to its God
so swiftly, with such gratitude and joy,
58 as now, to hear her words ring, I became.
I set my love so wholly on that Sun
that He, in oblivion, eclipsed even Beatrice.
61 This did not trouble her. She smiled at it.
And brightness from the laughter in her eyes
shared out to many things my one whole mind.

64 Bright beyond seeing, I saw, now, many ﬂares
make us their centre and themselves our crown,
still sweeter even in voice than radiance.
67* Sometimes, in that same way, we see a zone
around Latona’s daughter – lunar rays,
held in by gravid air, which form her belt,
70 There in that heavenly court from which I come
are found so many jewels, so ﬁne, so rare,
they cannot be abstracted from that realm.
73 The singing of the lights was one of these.
So minds who don’t, self-winged, coming ﬂying here, must
wait to gather news from tongues struck mute.
76 And when, still singing, all these burning suns
had spun three turns around us where we were –
as stars more swift the closer to ﬁxed poles –
79 girl-like in formal dance they looked to me,
in ﬁgure still but silent, pausing now,
listening until they caught the next new note.
82* And deep in one of these I heard begin: ‘When
rays of grace igniting love in truth –
those rays through which, in loving, love still grows – 85
reﬂect in you so multiplied that you
are led along with them to climb this stair,
which none descends who will not rise again,
88 whoever, seeing this, should then withhold
the wine ﬂask that you thirst for counts as free no more
than rain not streaming to the ocean.
91 You wish to know what plants these are – enﬂowered,
entranced – a garland round that donna who,
in beauty, strengthens you to dare the skies.
94* I was a lamb within that holy ﬂock
that Dominic conducts along the road
where “All grow fat who do not go astray”.
97* This one, who here is nearest on my right,
was master to me, and a brother, too –
Albert of Köln. I’m Thomas Aquinas.

100 And if you wish to know the rest as well,
then follow with your eyes the words I speak,
circling around this interwoven string.
103 The next ﬂame blazes out from Gratian’s smile.
He’s loved in Paradise for having served
both civil and ecclesial courts so well.
106 Then next, that Peter ornaments our choir
who, like the widow in Saint Luke’s account,
oﬀered his treasured all to Holy Church.
109 The ﬁfth light, and the loveliest of us all,
breathes with such love that everyone down there
hungers to have fresh word if he is saved.
112* A mind so high is there, to which was sent
knowledge so deep that, if the truth is true,
no second ever rose who saw so much.
115 You see a candle shining by him there
that saw, while in the ﬂesh, most inwardly
the nature of the angels and their works.
118 Then in the very smallest of these lights
there smiles the one who spoke for Christian times.
Augustine cited him in what he wrote.
121 Now if, to track my words of praise, you draw
the eye of intellect from light to light,
already you’ll be thirsting for the eighth.
124 Rejoicing, deep within, to see all good,
the blessèd soul is there who made quite plain
the world’s fallaciousness – to all who’d hear.
127 The body he was driven from lies, now,
below in Golden Heaven Church. He came
to peace from exile, from his martyrdom.
130 Burning beyond, you see the breathing ﬁres
of Bede, then Isidore and Richard, too –
in contemplation he was more than man.
133 The one from whom your glance returns to me
is light born of that spirit who, oppressed
in thought, saw death, it seemed, come all too slow.

136* This is the everlasting light of Siger,
whose lectures, given in Straw Alleyway,
argued for truths that won him envious hate.’
139* And now, like clocks that call us at the hour
in which the Bride of God will leave her bed
to win the Bridegroom’s love with morning song,
142 where, working, one part drives, the other draws –
its ‘ting-ting’ sounding with so sweet a note
that now the spirit, well and ready, swells –
145 so in its glory I beheld that wheel
go moving round and answer, voice to voice,
tuned to a sweetness that cannot be known,
148 except up there where joy in-evers all.

CANTO 11

1 Those idiotic strivings of the human mind!
How ﬂawed their arguments and logic are,
driving our wings to ﬂap in downward ﬂight.
4 Some follow Law. Some drift (great tomes in hand)
to Medicine, others train in priestly craft.
Some rule by force, as others do by tricks.
7 Some choose to steal, some trade in politics,
some toil, engrossed in pleasures of the ﬂesh,
and others concentrate their minds on ease,
10 while I, released from all that sort of thing,
was gathered up on high with Beatrice
in glorious triumph to the heavenly spheres.
13 When each soul, dancing, had returned to that
position on the circle where it once had been,
all paused, like candles in a chandelier.
16 And in that ﬂare which spoke to me at ﬁrst,
I, hearing, sensed these words begin, smiling
as in their brilliance they became more pure.
19 ‘As I am here a mirror to the radiance
of everlasting light, so, looking back,
I grasp, in that, the wherefore of your thoughts.
22 You have your doubts. You want me to deﬁne –
with sharper and more open explanations,
directed at your human ear – the words
25* I uttered earlier: “Where all grow fat…”
and where I said: “No second ever rose.”
We need to make distinctions as to that.

28 The providence that rules the universe,
in counsels so profound that all created
countenance will yield before it ﬁnds its depth,
31 intended that the Bride of Christ (He wooed her
with His sacred blood, His cries raised high)
should go to her Belovèd in delight,
34 sure of herself and truer still to Him,
and so ordained two princes that, on either side,
should walk along with her and be her guide.
37 The one was seraph-like in burning love,
the other in intelligence a splendour
on the earth that shone like Heaven’s cherubim.
40 I’ll speak of one. For – take whichever man –
in prizing him, you’ll praise the other, too.
Their diﬀerent actions served a single plan.
43* Between the Tupin and the stream that runs
down from the hill that saintly Ubald chose,
a fertile slope hangs oﬀ that mountainside
46 from which Perugia, through its Sun Gate, feels
both heat and chill. Behind that ridge are, weeping,
Nòcera and Gualdo, bowed by wind and shade.
49 And where its swiftest incline crashes down,
another sun was born to light the world –
as our sun ranges, sometimes, from the Ganges.
52* Let those, inventing words to suit that place,
not voice “Assisi” as “Ascesi” or “Arisen”
(these words all want) but properly the “Orient”.
55 Nor was he far from his own rising dawn
when he began to make his country feel,
by his true powers, a certain strengthening.
58* Headlong he ran – a callow boy – to war
and fought, against his father, for a girl
to whom – as though to death – all lock joy’s door.
61 So, coram patre in the bishop’s court,
he joined himself with her and, ever on,
from day to day he loved her all the more.

64 She, sad and widowed of her ﬁrst beloved,
remained a thousand years (and more) till he
came on to her – obscure, undated, scorned.
67* Nor did it count to hear how Caesar – terror
of the world – had found her true, unwavering,
with Amyclas, not moved by his command.
70 Nor did it count to hear that, likewise, she,
so ﬁerce, so constant, wept (Mary herself
remained below) with Christ upon his Cross.
73 But lest in what I say I prove unclear,
then understand, in all I’ve just poured out,
this loving pair are Francis and pure Poverty.
76 The harmony, the looks of happiness
between these two, their tenderness and care,
their love, so wonderstruck, became the cause
79* of holy thoughts in Bernard (now revered),
the ﬁrst who ﬂung his shoes away and raced –
running, he thought himself too slow – for peace.
82 Such rampant goodness, riches yet untold!
Egidio ﬂung his shoes away, Sylvester his,
chasing the groom, the bride so pleased them all.
85 So oﬀ he goes, Saint Francis, father, lord.
His bride was Poverty, his family these –
their waists already bound with simple cord.
88 Nor in abjection did it weigh his brows
to be Pietro Bernadone’s kid,
nor when, amazingly, he faced disdain.
91* Rather, in sovereign manner he revealed
his stern intention to Pope Innocent,
who granted this devotion its ﬁrst seal.
94 And when his little pauper-company
had grown (the wonder of his life would sound
far more when sung in glory in the skies),
97 this archimandrite in his holy will
was crowned now with a second diadem,
breathed by Eternal Spirit through Honorius.

100* Then after, thirsting for a martyr’s fate,
he preached (before the Sultan’s prideful throne)
his faith in Christ and all who followed him,
103* but found these people loath and far too sour
to change their ways. So, not to wait in vain,
he soon returned, to tend Italian vines.
106 A rough crag splits the Arno’s course from Tiber.
There Francis took from Christ the ﬁnal seal,
and on his limbs for two years bore that sign.
109 And when the one who’d dealt him so much good
was pleased to draw him up to that reward
which Francis earned through his great lowliness,
112 he then bestowed his donna , held so dear,
on followers and brothers, his true heirs,
commanding them, in faith, to love her well.
115 And from her bosom this illustrious soul
then chose to part, returning to his realm,
and chose no other bier for his own corpse.
118* Think of the other now, what he was like
if ﬁt to work with Francis and maintain
the Ship of Peter on its rightful track.
121 Such was our patriarch, Saint Dominic.
And those who follow him as he commands
will bear, as you can tell, a precious freight.
124 But now this pastor’s ﬂock turns ravenous
for weird new fodder, so they cannot fail
to scatter wide through many diﬀerent leas.
127 The further – wilful, wandering and wild –
his sheep desert him, so the emptier
they are of milk, returning to the fold.
130 It’s true that some are fearful of such harm,
huddling against their shepherd still. They’re few.
There’s not much cloth now needed for their cowls.
133 Now if my words in meaning aren’t too faint,
if you have been attentive, hearing them,
if you call what’s been said to mind once more,

136 in part what you desire will be content.
You’ll see why that ﬁrm plant is torn to shreds,
and see the strict correction that contends:
139 “Where all grow fat that do not go astray.” ‘

CANTO 12

1* The moment that this consecrated ﬂame
had plucked the string to sound its ﬁnal word,
the holy grinding stone began to wheel.
4 Nor had it gone a whole rotation through
before a second circle closed around,
and coupled move to move and song with song –
7 songs that defeat, in gentle trumpet calls,
our muses and all siren-songs as much
as primal splendour does its mirrored light.
10 Compare: when haughty Juno bids her maid,
then double rainbows arch through ﬁne-spun cloud,
concentric and the same in all their hues,
13 the inner brings the outer into life
(as, too, the words, astray, entranced, of Echo, whom love
dispersed as sun consumes the mist)
16 and these arcs show, for people here on earth,
as tokens of the pact God made with Noah
the world would never suﬀer ﬂood again.
19 So, too, these swirls of sempiternal rose
circled around us in their double band.
So too the outer answered that within.
22 When once their galliard – their festal joy,
their singing and their ﬂame-darts each to each, light
meeting light, wooing and rejoicing – 25 all at one point,
together in one will,
at last were quieted (as eyelids, too,

both moved by one delight, are closed and raised) 28 then
from the heart of one of these new lights
there moved a voice which made me turn to there, it
seemed, as needle to magnetic star.
31* ‘The love that makes me lovely,’ this began,
‘draws me to speak about that other lord
whose aide has spoken here so well of mine.
34 It’s right, where one is, that we name his peer,
for these two soldiered to a single end
and so their glorious triumphs shine as one.
37 Christ’s ﬁghting force (so costly to re-arm)
was marching on beneath its battle sign,
but slow and watchful now, and much worn down.
40 But then that Emperor who will always reign,
through grace alone and not through their desert,
provided for His soldiers, so perhaps-ed.
43 He raced to aid His bride (as said before)
with two great heroes by whose words and deed
the people who had strayed came running back.
46 Westward, in regions where mild Zephyrs rise –
to open out the fresh new foliage
with which all Europe sees itself reclothed –
49 not far from where those breaking waves resound
beyond which, when the time comes round, the sun, its
long course over, sinks and hides from men,
52 there stands, so blessed by fortune, Calaruega
protected by that great Castilian shield
which, quartered, bears the lion, high and low.
55 And here, impassioned by the Christian faith,
the love-sick knight was born, a champion,
kind to his own, but harsh to enemies.
58* And mind in him no sooner took on form
than mind was ﬁlled so full of living strength
he made, while still enwombed, his mother prophesy.
61 Then wedded, at the well of baptism,
to Faith (where Faith and he, as marriage gift,

each vowed salvation mutually to each),
64 the lady speaking as his sponsor there
saw in a dream the fruit to wonder at
that he and his inheritors would bear.
67 And so that all he was might show in words,
a spirit moved from Heaven to form his name –
the adjective of whose he wholly was.
70 They called him Dominic. I speak of him
as farmer – called and singled out by Christ,
to work His orchard and to help it thrive.
73 He seemed one sent, in truth, to follow Christ.
The ﬁrst love that was manifest in him
obeyed the ﬁrst command that came from Christ.
76 And many times his nurse discovered him,
awake, unspeaking, stretched out on the ground,
as though he meant to say: “For this I came.”
79 Felix, O truly happy, his father!
O truly blessed, his mother Giovanna –
her name in Hebrew, rightly read, means “grace”.
82* Not craving worldly wealth (like those who ape
the Ostian lawyer or a Doctor Tad)
but loving, purely, manna of God’s truth,
85 he soon became a scholar of great worth,
and hence determined to patrol those vines
that white-rot strikes when growers are no good.
88 Before the papal throne – more generous once
(not now) to poor, true hearts, grown so diseased through
his fault reigning now, and not its own – 91 he sought no
leave to pay mere halfs and thirds,
no ﬁrst shot at some well-paid vacancy,
no tax rebated quae sunt pauperes ,
94* rather, against a world of wilful lies,
licence to battle for the seed of truth,
whose saplings – twenty-four – here bind you round.
97 And then he moved with learning and with zeal,
as also with his mandate from the pope,

like some ﬁerce torrent surging down a hill.
100 And at the thicket of the heretics
he struck with all his impetus,
the stronger where resistance was the worse.
103 Then many streams were formed within his wake
to irrigate the orchard of the Church
and keep the shrubs there growing better still.
106* Take this to be the chariot’s second wheel,
mounted by Holy Church, in self-defence
to drive all civil nuisance from the ﬁeld.
109 And then you’ll see laid plain before your eyes
how excellent the other is – to whom,
before I came, Saint Thomas was so courteous.
112* The track, however, that the wheel-tread leaves
has gone all wrong at its circumference.
Where once the wine-crust crisped, it’s musty now.
115 His retinue – which once, in his own prints,
trod straight and true – has done a turn-about.
So toes now spring where once the heels had been.
118 And soon we’ll see what crops bad farming yields,
when tares and weeds, complaining, will all whine, being
denied safe storage in the barn.
121 Granted, whoever browsed through, page by page,
our master-roll would ﬁnd there still and read: “I in myself
am what I always was.”
124 But not the Acquaspartan or the Casalese.
For these are such as either ﬂee, or take
too strictly, text and rule ad litteram.
127 I am the living heart of Bonaventure –
Bagnoregensian. In public works
I set aside all underhand concerns.
130* The ﬁrst who joined our barefoot band, and twined
the cord, as friends to God, around their waists, are here –
Illuminato, Agostino, too.
133 Along with them is Hugo of Saint Victor,
Peter of Spain – who glitters there below

in twelve ﬁne tomes – and Peter Mangiador,
136 Nathan the Seer, the Bishop Metropolitan
Chrysostom, Anselm and Donatus next,
who set his hand to write the grammar rules.
139 Raban is here and, shining by my side,
Dom Joachim, Calabrian by birth,
endowed with all his gifts of prophecy.
142 To praise (and envy!) of Count Dominic
I’m moved by that same burning courtesy
of Brother Thomas and his well-judged words,
145 which moved this company along with me.’

CANTO 13

1* Imagine, if you truly want to know
what I saw now – and while I’m speaking grip
this image ﬁrm, as though a steady rock –
4 some ﬁfteen stars, from various demesnes,
that bring the heavens to life with light so clear
they overcome the thickest weave of air.
7 Imagine, too, the Wain which needs, by day or night,
no arc more ample than our lap of sky –
its turning plough shaft never lost to view.
10 Imagine, too, the bell mouth of the Horn,
its point beginning at the axle end
round which the wheel that starts the cosmos rolls.
13 Imagine these all forming, in the sky,
two signs among themselves (as when the child
of Minos, Ariadne, felt death’s chill)
16 so that the rays of one contained the next
and each was now revolving diﬀerently,
one set in this direction, one in that,
19 you’ll have a shade, then, almost, of that true
constellation – the dance that, doubled there,
circled around the point where I was now.
22* That goes as far beyond the norms we know
as does that sphere which outruns all the rest
beyond the sluggish current of Chiana.
25* Those songs there praised not Bacchus nor Peana.
They sang three persons all divine in kind,
and in one person human and divine.

28 The singing done, the measured round complete,
these holy lights stretched out their thought to us,
rejoicing in themselves at this new care.
31 The silence, then, of these concordant powers
was broken by that light in whom I’d heard
the story told of God’s dear down-and-out.
34* ‘When once,’ he said, ‘one crop of straw is threshed,
and once the grain from that is gathered in,
then love calls gently that I ﬂail the next.
37 Your view is this, that, ﬁrstly, in that breast
from which a living rib was drawn to make
Eve’s lovely cheek (her taste once cost us all),
40 and then in Him – His side pierced by the lance –
who paid full satisfaction, ﬁrst and last,
and so outweighed the scales of guilt and sin,
43 were poured infusions of the greatest light
that we in human nature rightly have,
drawn from that Worth that ﬁrst made these two men.
46 Thinking all this, you wonder at my tale
when I declare: “No second ever rose”
to match the good enclosed in that ﬁfth light.
49 Now clear your eyes to what my answer is.
Then what you think and what I say, agree,
you’ll ﬁnd, in truth, as circles round one point.
52 Those things that cannot die and those that can
are nothing save the splendours of the One
Idea that, loving, brought our Lord to birth.
55 For Living Light, which, from the Fount of Light,
cascades in ways that do not disunite it,
from Him or from the Love en-three-ing them,
58 in generosity collects its rays,
as mirrored in nine ranks of life anew,
itself eternally remaining One.
61 Down to the outermost of what can be,
from act to act descending, it becomes
maker of, merely, brief contingencies.

64 And, here, by “brief contingencies” I mean
those things produced – in seed or mineral –
by generative inﬂuence of moving spheres.
67 The wax of these – as, too, the hand that guides –
is never steady in some single mode,
but gleams, here more, here less, beneath the ideal sign.
70 It happens, therefore, that the self-same wood
bears, in its species, better fruit or worse.
So humans, too, are born with diﬀerent gifts.
73 And were that wax point-perfectly embossed,
and were the heavens at the height of power,
the light of that ﬁrst seal would show in full.
76 Yet Nature, as created, falls far short.
It operates as any craftsman will
who knows his trade and yet has trembling hands.
79 If Love, though, in its fervent warmth arrays
and prints the clear regard of Primal power,
entire perfection will be here acquired.
82 The earth was once made worthy in this way
of all that creatures perfectly may be.
So, too, the Virgin was made big with child.
85 I do, therefore, commend the view you take,
that human nature never was before,
nor was to be, as, once, in these two men.
88 But now suppose I did not follow on,
“How is it, then, that he can have no peer?”
these are the words that you’d begin to speak.
91 And yet to clarify what is not clear,
think who this was, and what – when “Ask!” was said –
moved him, in prayer, to ask as he then did.
94 My words have not been such that you can’t see
this man was once a king who simply asked
for wisdom to fulﬁl his kingly role,
97* and not to know how many astral drives
there are up there or whether, logically,
necesse and contingents prove necesse ,

100 or si est dare primum motum esse
or if half-circles can contain a shape
that is a triangle but not a “right” .
103 It follows, if you note all I have said,
that what I meant my arrow-shot to strike
is kingly wisdom, matchless mode of sight.
106 And if you look, clear-eyed, on that word “rose”,
you’ll see the phrase applies to kings alone –
so many, yet so few who’re any good.
109 So, hearing what I say, make that distinction,
and all will stand at one with what you hold,
as to our father Adam and our best Beloved.
112 And let this be a lead weight on your feet,
so that you move as slow as if worn out
to any “yes” or “no” unclear to you.
115 For no fool is as low a fool as one
who taking either of these steps will fail
aﬃrming or denying in distinction.
118 So often when our judgement rushes on,
it happens that we veer in false directions
and then emotions bind the intellect.
121 In ﬁshing for the truth without that skill,
it’s worse than useless to cast oﬀ from shore.
You’ll not return the same as you set out.
124* And patent proof of this throughout the world
are Bryson and Parmenides, Melissus and all,
who went their way not knowing where they went,
127* as Arius did, Sabellius, too, and all those fools
whose heresies have gashed the Holy Word,
returning from its rightful gaze sheer wrong.
130 And then again, don’t let folk be too sure
in passing judgement as do those who price
the harvest in the ﬁeld before it’s ripe.
133 For I have seen, at ﬁrst, all winter through
a thorn bush shows itself as stark and ﬁerce,
which after bears a rose upon its height.

136 And I have seen a keel, steered swift and well,
speed over oceans all its voyage through,
then perish at the entrance to the dock.
139 And so when Mrs Smith and Mr Jones
see one man steal, another oﬀer alms,
don’t let them think they see this in God’s plan.
142 The thief may rise, the other take a fall.’

CANTO 14

1 Centre to circle or circle to centre:
water in a round container moves like that,
depending where the rim is struck, inside or out.
4 I utter here the instant thought that chanced
across my mind when now, in all its glory,
the life of Thomas Aquinas fell silent,
7 born from resemblances that now arose
between his words and these that, after him,
were voiced by Beatrice. She began:
10 ‘This man still needs – although he does not say,
nor is he even thinking it as yet –
to trace another truth down to its root.
13 Tell him: that light in which, as what you are,
your being in its substance is in-ﬂowered,
will that remain eternally with you?
16 And if it does remain, then tell him how,
when once you are remade as visibles,
it cannot spoil your eyesight, being so.’
19 Compare: as dancers – wheeling, drawn and pressed
by keener happiness at certain points –
exult in voice, their gestures quickening,
22 so now, to hear her prompt, devoted prayer,
the holy circles showed new joy, in turns
of ﬂashing speed and notes to wonder at.
25 Whoever mourns to think we here must die,
to live our lives up there, has never seen
the cool refreshment of the eternal shower.

28 The one and two and three who always lives
and always reign in three and two and one,
uncircumscribed and circumscribing all,
31 had, three times now, been lauded in the songs
of every spirit there, the melody
a condign prize, however great the worth.
34* Then, in the holiest of lights among
the lesser ring, I heard a voice (as modest
as the angel’s, maybe, to Maria was),
37 answering: ‘As long as this great festival
of Paradise goes on, so, too, our love
will cast these robes in rays around us all.
40 That brightness follows from their inward ﬁre,
that ﬁre from vision. And their sight extends
as far as each, beyond their due, has grace.
43 But when the glorious and sacred ﬂesh
is clothing us once more, our person then
will be – complete and whole – more pleasing still.
46 For then whatever has been granted us,
by utmost good, of free and gracious light
(the light through which we see Him) will increase.
49 Hence, as must be, our seeing will increase,
increasing, too, the ﬁre that vision lights,
the ray increasing that proceeds from that.
52 But just as burning coal may give out ﬂames,
yet overcome these with its own white light,
keeping, within, its shape and semblance whole, 55 so,
too, the shining-out that rings us round
will, in appearance, be surpassed by ﬂesh
which all day long the earth now covers up.
58 Nor can it be that so much light will tire.
Our organs, physically, will have the strength
for every pleasure that can come to us.’
61 So ready and alert they seemed to me –
those double choirs – to add their plain ‘Amen’

they showed their keen desire for long dead bones, 64 not
only for themselves but for their mums,
their fathers, too, and others dear to them,
before they were these sempiternal ﬂames.
67 Look! Round those circles, matched in clarity,
a lustre, more than what was there, was born,
as though a new horizon, brightening.
70 When early evening hours are drawing in,
new things begin to show across the sky
so that the sight both seems and seems not true.
73 There, too, it seemed to me that newer things
began to rise to view and form a ring
beyond the circumscription of those two.
76 True spark shower ﬂying from the Holy Breath!
How suddenly it ﬂared, how incandescent!
My eyes, defeated, could not bear the sight.
79 But Beatrice showed herself to me –
laughing, so beautiful she must be left
among things seen that memory can’t pursue.
82* And so my eyes, regaining their right strength,
lifted once more. I saw myself alone,
borne with my lady to a higher good.
85 Seeing the ﬂares of laughter in that star,
which seemed now far more ﬁery than before,
I knew full well that I’d been lifted higher.
88 With all my heart and with that tongue – ﬂaming
alike in all our thoughts – aﬂame, I made to God burnt
oﬀerings that ﬁtted this new grace.
91 Nor had the ardour of that sacriﬁce
been drained still from my heart before it was, I knew,
propitious and acceptable.
94* For shining so – a ruby in its hue –
splendour appeared to me in two crossed rays.
‘Eliosun!’ I said. ‘You grant this accolade.’
97 The galaxy, distinctly marked by lights,

both great and small, between the earth’s two poles,
glistens and makes the learnèd wonder why.
100 So too, like constellations in the depths
of Mars, these rays composed the honoured sign
that quadrants (joined within a circle) form.
103 And here remembering surpasses skill:
that cross, in sudden ﬂaring, blazed out Christ so I can ﬁnd
no ﬁt comparison.
106 But those who take their cross and follow Christ
will let me oﬀ where, wearily, I fail,
seeing in that white dawn, as lightning, Christ.
109 From horn to horn, from summit down to base,
there moved here scintillating points of light, bright as
their paths met, bright in passing on.
112 So minute specks of matter can be seen –
renewing how they look at every glance,
straight in their track, oblique, long, short, swift, slow –
115 moving through sunbeams that will sometimes
streak
the shade that people, to protect themselves,
have won through their intelligence or art.
118 As harp or viol – in tempered harmony,
their many strings stretched tight – still ring and sing,
even to those who do not catch the tune,
121 so, though I did not understand their hymn,
an air now gathered that enraptured me
from lights appearing there throughout the cross.
124 I realized full well it sang high praise
for, as to one who does not understand
yet hears, there came to me, ‘Rise up!’ and ‘Win!’
127 At which, I sank so deep in love of this
that never till that time had anything
entrammelled me in such delightful bonds.
130 These words of mine may seem perhaps too bold,
slighting the pleasure of those lovely eyes,
in which, when gazing, my desires all rest.

133 Whoever thinks, though, that the living prints
of every beauty grow the more they rise,
and notices I did not turn to these,
136 will make excuse for what I here confess
to win excuse, and see me speak the truth.
Holy delight is not excluded here.
139 Rather, in rising it will grow more pure.

CANTO 15

1* Good will (to which the love that breathes aright
will always in its distillation ﬂow,
as does cupidity to wickedness)
4 brought silence to that sweetly sounding lyre,
and stilled the motion of its holy strings,
which Heaven’s right hand both plucks and modulates.
7 How can it be that those true beings there
whose choir of silence urged me on to pray
will ever turn deaf ears to honest prayer?
10 It’s only right that all know endless grief
who, loving only things that can’t endure,
steal from themselves, eternally, true love.
13 Sometimes, across a pure, untroubled sky,
there runs an instantaneous ﬂash of ﬁre,
moving our steady eyes to trace its course,
16 from which, it seems, a star is changing place,
except that, at the point it caught alight,
nothing is lost, nor does it last for long.
19 So, from the right extension of the cross
down to its foot, there ran an astral spark
which left the constellation shining there.
22 Nor did that gem stone leave its bezelled rim,
but ran a length along the radial beam,
as ﬁre behind some alabaster screen.
25 So, too, the shadow of Anchises showed
(if we give credence to our greatest muse),
seeing his son approach him in Elysium.

28* ‘O sanguis meus, o superinfusa
gratia Dei, sicut tibi cui
bis unquam celi ianua reclusa?’
31* The light spoke thus. I gave my mind to him,
then turned to see my lady’s countenance,
amazed at what I saw on either side.
34 For laughter in her eyes now burned so bright
that, as I thought, I touched the very depths
of all I gloried in – and Paradise.
37 Then, full of joy, in hearing as in sight,
the spirit added to those opening words,
which I’d not understood – he spoke so deep –
40 though he’d not hidden from me out of choice,
but rather of necessity, his thought
so set itself above our mortal mark.
43 And when the bow shot of his burning love
had so far settled that his speech came down
to reach the target of our intellect,
46* the ﬁrst thing that I came to understand
was: ‘Blessèd be Thou, the Triune and the One
who’s graced my seed with so much courtesy.’
49 He then went on: ‘My son, a long, glad fast –
drawn out in reading from the noble book
where there can be no change of white and black –
52 you now relieve me of, within this light
from which I speak. All thanks be hers
who clothes you in the wings for this great ﬂight.
55 You think that all your thoughts come down to me
from that which is the First – as ﬁve and six
come forth as rays, if clearly seen, from one.
58 And therefore why, myself, I am and seem
to you more jubilant than others here
who form this happy throng, you don’t inquire.
61 You think the truth. Within this rank of life,
the greatest and the least all gaze upon
the glass where thought, before you think, is shown.

64 But (may the holy love wherein, with sight
perpetual, I watch and whence, with sweet
desire, I thirst, be all the more fulﬁlled!)
67 be conﬁdent in voice, be brave and glad
to sound your will, to sound your best desire,
to which my answer has been long decreed.’
70 I turned to Beatrice, who had heard
before I spoke. She smiled me such a sign
that made the wings of will in me grow strong.
73* And so I now began: ‘In you, each one,
the heart was balanced equally with mind
when Primal Equipoise appeared to you.
76 The Sun that gleams and burns in you
itself is, equally, both light and ﬁre,
so ﬁnely gauged comparison falls short.
79 But will and intellect in mortal minds
(for reasons that are manifest to you)
are diﬀerent in the plumage of their wings.
82 And I discern, since I am mortal, in
myself the same unequalness. My heart
alone must thank you for your father-words.
85 Truly I beg you, Topaz live and bright,
in-gemmed so joyfully within this jewel,
to bring your name to me in satisfaction.’
88 ‘My branch and leaf (in whom I was well pleased,
waiting until you came) I was your root.’
His opening words, as he replied, were these.
91* And then he said: ‘The one from whom your clan
takes its cognomen has trodden now the ﬁrst ring
of the hill below a hundred years or more.
94 He was my son, to you great-grandfather.
It’s right that, by your works on his behalf,
you render short the time of his long labour.
97* Florence, within the ancient ring, from which
she takes the bell-sound still of terce and nones, lived on
in modesty, chasteness and peace.

100 No bangles had she, nor a showy crown,
no exquisite, embroidered skirts, no sash
more meant for viewing than the person was.
103* As yet the birth of daughters did not bring
fear to the father: since no wedding dower
nor early marriage passed the proper norm.
106* As yet, no house too roomy for its clan –
no Sardanapalus had yet arrived
to show what you can do in private rooms.
109* As yet, no Monte Mario in Rome
was beaten by your Aviary which wins
in rising high – as well as sinking low.
112* Bellincion Berti I saw girded there
with leather and bone, and, leaving her mirror,
his lady, her face without cosmetic.
115 I saw the Nerli and del Vecchio
content to wear the plainest skin and hide,
their women occupied with loom and ﬂax.
118 How fortunate these were, each being sure
of where her grave would be! None yet was left
alone in bed by men who’d gone to France.
121 One, still awake, would watch around the crib
and soothe the baby, babbling in the tongue
that parents thrill to in the early days.
124 Another, drawing tresses from the spool,
sat with her family and told them tales
of Trojans, of Fiesole and Rome.
127* Lewd Cianghellas or sly Salterells
would then have seemed a marvel just as great
as Cincinnatus now or proud Cornelia.
130 To this so tranquil and composed, so ﬁne
a life of citizens, to such a true
civility, so sweet a resting place,
133* Maria gave me (birth-pangs called her name).
And in your ancient Baptistery, I was
a Christian, and was Cacciaguida, too.

136 My brothers were Moronto and Eliseo.
My honoured wife came down from Val di Pado,
and hence derived the surname that you bear.
139* I followed Emperor Conrad on crusade
and, rising in his favour by my deeds,
he bound me with all dignities of knighthood.
142 I went behind him to oppose the wrong
of that misguided law whose devotees
usurp (it is your pastors’ fault) true justice.
145 There at the hand of this foul horde was I
unravelled from this world of vanities,
through love of which so many are besmirched,
148 and came from martyrdom to this pure peace.’

CANTO 16

1* Nobility of blood, that whim of ours!
If here on earth, where feeling is so frail,
you make us boast the glories you bestow,
4 to me henceforth that’s nothing wonderful.
For there – in Heaven, I mean – where appetite
is never skewed, I, too, have boasted so.
7 You are, of course, a mantle that soons shrinks.
So if you’re not patched up from day to day,
Time with its pinking shears will circle you.
10* So with that ‘Thou’ that ancient Romans used –
its clan, though, doesn’t keep the usage up –
the words began once more to come from me.
13 At this Beatrice (some way away)
smiled in the manner of the one who coughed
to mark the ﬁrst mistake of Guinevere.
16 Thus I began: ‘Thou art indeed my father.
In me thou hast inspired my daring speech.
Thou raisest me so I am more than I.
19 Filled by these many streams of happiness,
my mind rejoices in itself to bear
so much and not be shattered by the surge.
22 Tell me my earliest, my dearest growth,
who were your own progenitors? Also,
what years were marked for you as boy and youth.
25* Tell me how great the sheepfold of Saint John
at that time was, and which inhabitants
deserved the most to sit on highest thrones.’

28 As coals, when breezes breathe them into ﬂame,
brighten and live, this incandescence now
responded to my own persuasiveness.
31 And as his beauty in my eyes increased,
so too his voice grew gentler, sweeter still,
though not in speech we moderns might employ.
34 ‘From when,’ he answered, ‘the “Ave” was said,
to when my mother, sainted now, gave birth –
lightening herself of me, the weight she bore –
37* ﬁve hundred times and ﬁfty and thirty,
this ﬁre of Mars had come to strike new ﬂame
beneath the paws of constellation Leo.
40* My ancestors (like me) had all been born
within that district where your yearly race
begins to enter on its ﬁnal course.
43 That’s all you need to hear of my great sires.
Of who these were and from what place they came,
silence has greater dignity than speech.
46 Between the Baptistery and Mars, the sum
of those who rightly could bear arms was then
a ﬁfth of those who live there nowadays.
49* That population, though (now intermixed
with Campi and Fegghine and Certaldo folk),
was, to the merest craftsman, pure in blood.
52 Better by far that those of whom I speak
were distant neighbours still, so you maintained
Galluzzo and Trespiano as your outer bounds,
55 than have within you – and so bear the stench –
of peasant Aguglione or that Signa cad,
sharp-eyed as ever for a shady quid.
58* If some – the very worst, degenerate priests! –
had been as kind as mothers to their sons,
and not played step-dame to Imperial rights,
61* there’s one, now Florentine, who wheels and deals
who’d soon have gone to Semifonte again,
where all his forebears did their daily rounds.

64 The Montemurli would be Conti serfs,
the Cerchi still Acone villagers,
the Buondelmonti maybe still mere Grievians.
67 Miscegenation has at all times been
the origin, in cities, of all ills,
as when you gorge on undigested foods.
70 A blinded bull falls quicker to the ground
than any blinded lamb. A single sword
at times cuts cleaner and more sure than ﬁve.
73* Consider Urbisaglia and Luni, too,
how both these towns have gone, and how, behind,
go also Chiusi and Sinigaglia.
76 And when whole cities have, in this way, died,
it won’t seem strange or hard for you to hear
that tribes and clans can likewise be unmade.
79 All human things have their own deaths to meet,
as you do also (though in some, long-lived,
the truth of this lies hid). And lives are short.
82 And, as the turning of the moon above
covers the shore unrestingly, and then
uncovers it, so Fortune does with Florence.
85 This should not, therefore, seem remarkable –
all I shall tell of noble Florentines,
whose fame lies hidden now in passing time.
88 I saw the Ughi, I saw the Catellini,
Filippi, Ormanni, Greci e Alberichi,
already in decline, illustrious men.
91 As great as they were ancient, I saw, too,
Bostichi, Soldanieri and Ardinghians,
the Arca and Sannella here as well.
94 Nearby the gate – in present times so ﬁlled
with novel felonies of such great weight
that soon the vessel will unship its load –
97 were once the Ravignani, from whom sprang
Count Guido, and, in later times, the clan
that takes its name from great Bellincion.

100 La Pressa knew already what it meant
to serve in government. The Galigaio house
displayed the golden hilt and sword of chivalry.
103 The Pale of Vair already had grown great,
Giuochi, Sacchetti, Barucci, Fifanti,
the Galli, too – and those who blush for salt-fraud.
106 The stock that bore Calfuccians by now
was great, and also to the seats of power
Sizii and Arrigucci had been drawn.
109 How well I saw them then, those now destroyed
by their own pride! Armorial orbs of gold
made Florence ﬂower in all its enterprise.
112 So did the fathers, too, of those who now,
on ﬁnding that your bishop’s church is free,
grow fat as proxies in consistory.
115 That bullying crew – which dragons over those
who run, but acts the very lamb when tooth
or even purse is ﬂashed before its eyes –
118 they had arrived, though humble in their roots –
so Ubertin Donato looked askance
to be their kinsman through his own wife’s line.
121 The Caponsacco of Fiesole
had now come down to join the Market Place.
Giudi and Infangati were good citizens.
124 I’ll tell you this – incredible though true:
the gate through which one reached that little ring was
named in honour of some Pera clan!
127 Each of that House that bears upon its coat
the name of that great baron who’s renewed,
in worth and fame, at annual Thomas feasts,
130 received from him chivalric rank and dues,
though he who binds his fringe around this sign
makes common cause with lower orders now.
133* The Importunes and Gualterotts were here.
The Borgo would have been a calmer place
if they’d still lacked the neighbours that then came.

136 The House from which your ﬂowing tears were born –
driven by rancour, rightfully, that slew
and put an end to your so-happy life –
139 was honoured then, itself and all its kin.
O Buondelmonte! You so wrongly ﬂed,
as others urged, your marriage promises.
142 Many would now rejoice who now are sad
if God had yielded you to Ema’s stream
when you arrived a ﬁrst time in this town.
145 Yet this still had to be, that Florence made –
at Mars’s battered stone which guards the bridge – in her
last days of peace, this sacriﬁce.
148 With all these people and with others, too,
I saw Florentia in such repose
that nothing could have caused it to lament.
151* With all of these, so true and glorious,
I saw your citizens, the lily-ﬂag
not dragged, reversed upon its conquered pole,
154 nor coloured in the conﬂict bright blood red.’

CANTO 17

1* As Phaeton once, approaching Clymene,
to know for sure that news about himself
which still makes fathers chary of their sons,
4 so was I, too – and so was understood
by Beatrice and that holy lamp
which had, because of me, ﬁrst left its place.
7 At which my lady said: ‘Send out the ﬂare
of your desire, as clear in coming forth
as, inwardly, the ﬁre is stamped in you,
10 not to increase, by saying what that is,
the knowledge we already have, but more
to ﬁnd, when speaking out, we slake your thirst.’
13 ‘You, the dear soil in which I thrive. You so
on-high yourself that you see well (as sure
as mortals know, in triangles, two angles
16 aren’t obtuse) contingencies before
they come to be, your eye set wondering on
the point at which all times are present time.
19 While I was still in Virgil’s company,
climbing the hill that remedies our souls,
so, too, descending to the dead, waste world,
22 he spoke to me in grave and weighty words
about my future life, so I should feel
four-square against the blows that were to come.
25 I’d therefore willingly receive sure words
that told what fortune now draws near to me.
Those arrows that we know will come ﬂy slower.’

28 I said all this to that same light that, ﬁrst,
had spoken out to me, and thus confessed,
as Beatrice wished, what I desired.
31 Not in those enigmatic words that once
entrammelled pagan fools, like birds in lime,
before the Lamb of God bore oﬀ their sin,
34 but clear, precise and solemn in his speech,
that father-love now gave me his reply,
enclosed, yet shown, in his own laughing light.
37* ‘Contingency, whose sphere does not extend
beyond the margins of your earthly things,
is framed and painted in eternal sight.
40 This does not, though, imply necessity,
except, as might be when some glass reﬂects
a ship swept onward by a raging stream.
43 From that same view there comes before my eyes
(as to the ear sweet melodies may come)
the time that now prepares itself for you.
46* As once Hippolytus was driven out
of Athens by his father’s wife, perverse
and pitiless, so you’ll leave Florence, too.
49* This much is willed, this much already sought.
And soon he’ll see it through, who thinks it up,
where all day long Christ’s self is bought and sold.
52 Shrill cries of blame will chase the ones who lose –
they always do. But vengeance, when it falls,
will speak of that same Truth that deals it out.
55 You’ll leave behind you all you hold most dear.
And this will be the grievous arrow barb
that exile, ﬁrst of all, will shoot your way.
58 And you will taste the saltiness of bread
when oﬀered by another’s hand – as, too,
how hard it is to climb a stranger’s stair.
61* Yet what will weigh upon your shoulders worst
is all the foul, ill-minded company
that you, in that dark vale, will fall to keep.

64 For that ungrateful, crazy, vicious crew
will turn as one against you. Yet it’s them
whose brows before too long will blush with shame.
67 Their deeds will prove what animals they are.
And so much so, the ﬁner course for you
would be to form a party on your own.
70* Your refuge and your safe abode will be
the courtesy at ﬁrst of that great Lombard
whose blazon is a stair and holy bird.
73 And he will hold you in such high regard
that “ask” and “do” between the two of you
will place as ﬁrst what others put behind.
76 You’ll see, along with him, his brother, too,
so strongly marked, when he was born, by Mars
that all his deeds will prove remarkable.
79 People as yet know nothing of this man.
He is still fresh and young. The astral wheels
have worked around him for a mere nine years.
82* Before the Gascon tricks great Henry, though,
the sparks of his high virtue will appear,
scornful of silver and the toils of war.
85 His proud liberality will make its mark,
and even enemies, in seeing that,
will have no power to mute their tongues in praise.
88 Await him, and the good he’ll bring to you.
By him a multitude will be transformed,
the poor exalted and the rich brought low.
91 Now carry, written in your memory
(don’t speak!), report of him.’ He then said things that
even witnesses will not believe.
94 He added, then: ‘It was of this, dear son,
they spoke. These are the wiles and snares that lie
concealed by some few circlings of the stars.
97 Yet I’d not have you envy those around.
Your life and fame en-futures far beyond
the punishment their perﬁdy receives.’

100 Now falling silent, that most sacred soul
declared his hand unburdened of the thread
of that taut weave which I had stretched for him.
103 So I began – as anyone in doubt
goes on and craves good counsel from the one
who sees, whose will is right, whose love is strong.
106 ‘I now see clearly, Father, how the years spur down
on me – and how the blow they mean to strike
is worse to those who, ﬂeeing, ﬂinch aside.
109 It’s better, then, I arm myself with foresight,
so if that dearest place is snatched away,
my verses do not lose me all the rest.
112 Down through the world of endless bitterness,
around the mountain where my lady’s look
raised me so I could reach its lovely peak,
115 then through these heavenly spheres, from light to light
I’ve learnt of things which, if I now repeat,
will leave in many mouths an acid taste.
118 And if I prove a timid friend to truth
I shall, I fear, forego my life among
those souls who’ll count as ancient our own time.’
121 The light in which the treasure I found there
was smiling still, ﬁrst blazed in coruscations
as will a ray of sun in golden mirrors,
124 and then replied: ‘All murky consciences,
who feel their own or any other’s shame
are bound to baulk at your abrasive words.
127 But none the less, all lies put clean aside,
make plain what in your vision you have seen,
and let them scratch wherever they may itch.
130 For if at ﬁrst your voice tastes odious,
still it will oﬀer, as digestion works,
life-giving nutriment to those who eat.
133 The words you shout will be like blasts of wind
that strike the very summit of the trees.
And this will bring no small degree of fame.

136 For you’ve been shown in all these circling wheels –
around the mountain, in the sorrowing vale –
only those souls whose fame is widely known,
139 since those who hear you speak will never pause
or give belief to any instances
whose family roots are hidden or unknown,

CANTO 18

1 Already, whole in happiness, that mirror
had turned, rejoicing, to its own true word.
I tasted mine – and tempered sour with sweet.
4 And then that lady, leading me to God,
spoke out: ‘Revise those thoughts. Think this, that I am
near to Him who lifts all wrongs away.’
7 I turned towards that sound so full of love
(my strength, my comforter!) but saw, within
those holy eyes, a love I leave unsaid,
10 unsure not only of my powers of speech,
but Memory, as well – which cannot, if not led,
return, above itself, to that degree.
13 This much of that one point I can repeat:
my heart, in awe now looking back at her,
was free of all desires, save that alone –
16 as long, at least, as eternal pleasure,
shining in Beatrice’s lovely eyes,
made me, in its reﬂected view, content.
19 A smile – its light defeating me – she now
addressed me: ‘Turn around. Pay heed to him.
Heaven is found not only in my eyes.’
22 As sometimes here on earth a face is seen
displaying all its feelings – when the soul
is caught completely in these sentiments –
25 so in the ﬂaming of that holy ﬂare,
as now I turned to it, I recognized
a will to have some further words with me.

28 ‘In this, the ﬁfth espalier of that tree
that thrives,’ so he began, ‘from summit down,
bears constant fruit and never loses leaf,
31 are spirits of the blessed who, there below,
won such renown before they reached these spheres that
any muse which sang of them would thrive.
34 So look in wonder on this Cross’s horns.
Each one I name to you will act as does
the swift ﬁre darting through a thunder cloud.’
37* I saw, along the Cross-tree’s beam, a light,
drawn all along that length by Joshua’s name.
Nor did I note the name before the deed.
40 Then at the name of great Maccabeus,
I saw another, wheeling as it moved,
a spinning top whipped round by happiness.
43 Then, as the eye will track a falcon’s ﬂight,
my own attentive gaze now followed two,
seeking out Roland and great Charlemagne.
46 And then along the Cross my sight was drawn
to William, Reynald, Godfrey of Bouillon,
and with them, too, Roberto Guiscardo.
49 Then moving, mingling with the other lights,
the soul that ﬁrst had spoken now displayed
his own great art with these who sang the skies.
52 I turned to Beatrice at my right,
to see in her some gesture, word or sign,
to show me what my duty now must be,
55 and saw the light within her eye so clear,
so full of laughter that her look and air
defeated all that these, before, had been.
58 And, as we recognize from day to day
that we, in doing good, have now advanced
when, doing good, we feel a greater joy,
61 so, too, as with the skies I circled round,
I knew the arc through which we swung had grown, seeing
that miracle yet more adorned.

64 Compare: within the briefest span of time,
a lady pale in countenance will change,
when once she frees her blushing cheeks from shame.
67 At that same speed, turning, my eyes received
the candour of the temperate star – the sixth –
which now collected me within its sphere.
70 I saw in that great torch of Jupiter
the scintillations of a love that, here,
sparked signs before my eyes in human speech.
73 Like birds that rise above a river bank
and, chorusing in joy at food they ﬁnd,
form ﬂying discs and various other shapes,
76 so, deep in light, these holy creatures sang
and, as they winged around, they now assumed
the ﬁgure of a D, then I, then L.
79 Singing, at ﬁrst, the notes of their own tune,
they then (becoming one of these three signs)
paused for a moment and let silence fall.
82* You holy Pegasean Muse, who grants
to intellect its glory and long fame –
as, through such minds, to realms and cities, too – 85
inspire me with your light, so I may draw
those ﬁgures as I ﬁrst conceived they were.
In these brief verses let your power appear.
88* In ﬁve times seven vowels and consonants
it fashioned this display. And I took note
of all these parts as they appeared to me.
91 DILIGITE IUSTITIAM : these ﬁrst –
main verb and noun of all that bright design.
QUI IUDICATIS TERRAM – these came last.
94 And then they gathered on the ﬁnal M,
arranged so Jupiter seemed silver now
picked out in painted ornaments of gold.
97 And then I saw, descending, other lights
to mount the summit of the M and pause,
singing the Good, I think, that drew them to him.

100 Then, as when burning logs are struck, and sparks,
beyond all number, rise around (from which
fools, once, in pagan times drew auguries),
103 it seemed that from this more than a thousand
lights rose surging up, some higher, some less,
as God’s sun, kindling them, ascribed their place.
106 And, once each rested at its proper point,
I saw, distinctly shown in golden ﬁre,
the image of an Eagle’s head and neck.
109 He who paints there needs none to guide his hand.
He is the guide. From Him, we recognize,
derives the power that forms in our own nests.
112 Those others in beatitude who, ﬁrst,
in-lilying the M, had been content,
now joined, with no great movement, that same sign.
115 Sweetest of stars! So many gems, so ﬁne,
to make this known to me! Our justice is
produced by that great sky that you in-gem.
118 So I beseech the Mind, in which begins
the motion and the strength you have, now look
at where the fumes arise that taint your rays,
121* so that a second time He should now rage
at ‘buy’ and ‘sell’ within those temple walls,
once built by miracles and martyrdom.
124 You heavenly army that I gaze on now,
pray earnestly for those who are, on earth,
led by this vile example all astray.
127* War was at one time waged with swords alone.
But now it’s done by snatching, here and there,
the bread our loving Father locks from none.
130 But you – I write of you to blot you out –
just think that Paul and Peter who both died
to serve the vine that you lay waste, live still.
133 You may well say: ‘I’m ﬁrm in my desire
to be like John who lived his life alone,
drawn to his martyrdom by sprightly dance,

136 and so don’t know this ﬁsherman, or Paul.’

CANTO 19

1* It showed before me now with open wings –
that lovely emblem which those happy souls
composed in utmost frui , interwoven.
4 Each soul showed forth as minute rubies might.
In each a sun ray burned with such new ﬁre
its light, reﬂected, broke back from my eyes.
7 But now there’s something I must draw to mind
that no voice ever carried, ink inscribed,
or great imagination ever grasped.
10 I saw and heard that Eagle’s beak form words
that rang, in what they voiced, as ‘I’ and ‘mine’,
although in meaning they were ‘we’ and ‘us’.
13 ‘I am’ – beginning so – ‘through being true
and just in all things, raised to glorious heights
that no desire could ever overcome.
16 On earth I leave so great a memory
that even evil-minded men down there
who don’t take up the tale still honour it.’
19 From many coals we feel one wave of heat.
So, too, from all these many loving souls,
a single sound came issuing from its form.
22 So I at once: ‘You are, perpetually,
the ﬂowerings of eternal happiness.
And all your perfumes are, to me, as one.
25 Breathing upon me, set me free, untie
the hankering that’s held me now so long,
On earth I ﬁnd no food for it at all.

28 God’s justice, as I know from all I’ve seen,
is mirrored, in these spheres, by other realms.
But your sphere comprehends it, through no veil.
31* And you know how attentively I’ve come,
prepared to hear. You know the doubt as well,
the old, long hungering I suﬀer from.’
34 As falcons, shaking free from training-hoods,
will move their heads, applauding with their wings,
to show their zeal and make themselves look ﬁne,
37 so did this emblem, woven out of praise
that sang the glory of God’s grace, in hymns
that those who celebrate above will know.
40 ‘The One who turned His compass,’ it began,
‘around the reaches of the universe,
and marked, within, things clear and dark to view,
43 might blaze His worth upon that cosmic plan,
yet could not fail, in doing so, to leave,
as inﬁnite excess, His truest word.
46 As proof of this, that being, ﬁrst in pride,
the summit, once, of all creation, fell –
he would not wait for light – acid, unripe.
49 From which it’s clear that natures less than his
are all too shallow to contain that Good
which has no end and measures self by self.
52 Therefore, the powers of sight that you possess –
which must exist as rays from that one Mind
with which all things that are are brimming full –
55 cannot, in their own nature, be so great
that their Original should not have sight
of much beyond what, there, appears to them.
58 It follows that the sight your world receives
in sempiternal justice sinks itself
three-fold as deep as eyes in open sea.
61 Although you see the bottom near the shore,
the ocean ﬂoor you can’t. And yet it’s there.
Its depths conceal its being so profound.

64 There is no light except from that clear calm,
changeless, untroubled. Others are tenebrae,
the shadows or the venom of the ﬂesh.
67 It’s open now enough, that brooding deep –
where, hidden from you, living justice lay –
of which so frequently you’ve made demand.
70 “A man is born,” you’ve said repeatedly,
“beside the Indus. And there’s no one there
who speaks of Christ, or reads or writes of Him.
73 And all he does and all he means to do –
as far as human minds can tell – is good,
sinless alike in living and in word.
76 Then, unbaptized, beyond the faith, he dies.
Where is the justice that condemns him thus?
Where is his guilt, if he does not believe?”
79 Well, who are you to sit there on your throne,
acting the judge a thousand miles away,
eyesight as short as some mere ﬁnger span?
82 Of course, all those who seek to pin me down
might ﬁnd amazing reasons for their doubts,
except the Scriptures are set over you.
85 You earthbound creatures, dense in thought and head!
The Primal Will, which of itself is good,
has never from its own high good been moved.
88 What counts as just will ring in tune with that.
No creature-good draws that will to itself.
But that – its rays projecting – causes this.’
91 Compare: a mother stork has fed its young
and, while its chick, well-nourished, gazes up,
it ﬂies in circles high above the nest.
94 So, too, it rose – I raised my brows to it –
that emblem in its blessedness, which moved
with wings supported on the truths it spoke.
97 Wheeling, it sang and, singing, said: ‘To you
our melodies – which you don’t understand –
are as eternal justice is to mortal minds.’

100 And then these glowing ﬁres of Holy Breath
grew quiet once again within that sign
which, in the world, made Romans so revered,
103* then spoke anew: ‘There is, in this realm, none
who ever rose that had no faith in Christ
since, or before, they nailed Him to the wood.
106 But see this: many cry out: “Christ! Christ! Christ!”
Yet many will, come Judgement, be to Him
less prope than are those who don’t know Christ.
109 And Christians such as these the Ethiopian
will damn when souls divide between two schools,
some to eternal riches, some to dearth.
112 What will the Persians say about your kings,
when once they see that ledger opened up
in which is written all their praiseless doings.
115* P eer at that page, and see in Albert’s deeds
one – which will shortly stir God’s pen to write –
by which the realm of Prague lies waste and dead.
118 P eer at that page, and see there one who grieved
the Seine in uttering his worthless coin,
dying when toppled by a wild boar’s hide.
121 P eer at that page, and you’ll see there the pride
that sharpens in mad Englishmen and Scots
such thirst that neither keeps their native bounds.
124 O there you’ll see the lust and lecherous lives
of Spanish and Bohemian sovereigns,
who know no honour, nor desire to know.
127 O there you’ll see the Cripple of Jerusalem
scoring mere “one” for virtuous eﬀect,
and thousands in the column opposite.
130* O there you’ll see the weak-kneed graspingness
of one who governs in the isle of ﬁre
where once Anchises ended his long days.
133 ’X cept, to show how paltry his deeds are
the writing here will be in brief, maimed words,
and thus will note down much in little space.

136 ’X cept, to all the loathsome acts will show
of nuncle and his brud, those two who turned
so great a race to cuckolds – and two crowns.
139* ’X cept, the Portuguese and Norway kings
will there be recognized, the Rascian, too,
who set eyes falsely on Venetian coin.
142 O blessèd Hungary, if you resist
further bad government! Blessèd Navarre,
if you can arm the hills that swaddle you!
145 And that is pledged, as all should well believe,
by French-ruled Nicosia and Famagosta,
lamenting, shrieking in their agony
148 against their beast, who huddles with the rest.’

CANTO 20

1 When he whose ﬂame casts light round all the world
goes down and leaves our northern hemisphere –
and daylight therefore fades throughout these parts – 4
the sky, once lighted by the sun alone,
seems suddenly made new by many ﬂares,
reﬂections kindled from that single source.
7 These movements of our sky here came to mind
as now the world’s great sign – true guide of kings – fell
silent at its blessèd raptor-beak.
10 For all those lights, so vividly alive,
shining more brightly still, began a song
that glides like falling leaves from memory.
13 Love, which in laughter sweetly clothes itself,
how ardent in those piercing pipes you burned,
voiced by the breath of holy thoughts alone.
16 When all those lucid and so precious gems
with which, I saw, the sixth great light was set
had brought to silence their angelic peal,
19 I heard, it seemed, the murmur of a river,
falling from rock to rock in limpid streams
that show the swelling richness of its source.
22 Compare: guitar notes sound from where the fret
gets pressed – as, likewise, at its apertures
a reedy ﬂute when pierced by breaths of wind.
25 So here, the moment of delay now done,
that murmur, as in hollow columns, rose
through all the length of this great Eagle’s neck.

28 It formed there as a voice and, through the bill,
the phrases came, in words which I, at heart –
where I inscribed them all – was waiting for.
31* ‘This,’ it began, ‘is now required of you,
to look, eyes ﬁxed, upon that part of me
that sees, in earthly eagles, yet endures, the sun.
34 Of all the ﬁres from which I frame my form,
those sparks that make the eye shine in my head
appear as highest of the many grades.
37* There, at the centre of the pupil, see
David, the singer of the Holy Ghost,
who bore the Ark of God from place to place.
40 And now he knows the merit of his song –
as far as his own thought produced such verse –
here seeing how he’s paid in equal kind.
43 Then, of those ﬁve whose circle forms my brow,
he who is closest to my bill’s high bridge
consoled the widow for her murdered son.
46 And now he knows how great a price is paid
by those who aren’t by choice Christ’s followers.
He’s known life’s sweetness and its contrary.
49 The one who’s next in that circumference –
forming, I mean, around the upper brow –
made death, by his true penitence, come slow.
52 And now he knows eternal justice stands,
and does not alter when a worthy prayer
down there procrastinates quotidian things.
55 There follows next the one who, though his aims
were good, brought forth bad fruit, surrendering – now
Greek – with Law and Eagle-signs to Popes.
58 And here he knows that, though the world is wrecked,
the ill deriving from his well-meant act
has here for him no baneful consequence.
61 The one you see in that declining arc
was William, long-lamented by the land
that weeps that Charles lives still – and Frederick, too.

64 And here he knows what love this heaven feels
for righteous kings, and here he still displays
that understanding by his brilliant light.
67 And who, in that erroneous world down there,
would ever think that Trojan Ripheus
was ﬁfth within that round of holy lights?
70 Here, he now knows far more about God’s grace –
although his vision does not pierce the depths –
than any in the earthly world can see.’
73 A lark, as ﬁrst it mounts through airy space,
soars upward singing but is silent then,
ﬂush with the sweetness of its highest reach.
76 So, too, it seemed, that image of the print
of everlasting joy, at whose desire
each thing becomes what truly each thing is.
79 And though, in what I meant to ask, I was,
maybe, as glass that shows the hue it clothes,
these doubts could bear no silent waiting time,
82 but forced from my tensed lips: ‘What is all this?’
with all their weight and gathered impetus.
At which I saw a fěte of coruscations.
85 And after – as its eye burned brighter still –
that blessèd sign then gave me its reply,
so I’d not hang there long in wonderment.
88 ‘I see that you, because I say these things,
believe they’re so and yet cannot see why,
so these are hidden even though believed.
91 You act like someone who may know quite well
the name but not the essence of a thing,
unless by demonstration made to see.
94* Regnum celorum will submit to force
assailed by warmth of love or living hope,
which overcome the claims of God’s own will,
97 not in the manner that men beat down men
but win because will wishes to be won
and, won, wills all with all its own good will.

100 The ﬁrst life and the ﬁfth that mark this brow
cause you to wonder. You’re amazed to see
the realm of angels painted with these lights.
103 They left their bodies, contra your belief,
as Christian souls, not Gentiles, ﬁrm in faith
that His feet paced to past or coming pain.
106 Trajan from Hell – from where, to exercise
good will no soul returns – came back to bone,
this mercy granted him for living hope.
109 For living hope committed all its powers
in prayer to God to raise him up once more,
so that he could, in will, be made to move.
112 The glorious soul that we’re now speaking of,
returning even brieﬂy to his ﬂesh,
believed in Him whose power could bring him aid,
115 and, so believing, blazed forth in such ﬁres
of love in truth that he, on second death,
was ﬁt to make his way to this great game.
118 The other, by that grace which drops like dew –
its source so deep that no created eye
can ever penetrate the primal wave –
121 set all its love, down there, on righteousness.
God, therefore, opened Ripheus’s eyes,
grace upon grace, to when we’d be redeemed.
124 In that redemption, he believed. And so
he did not suﬀer any pagan stench,
but stood as blunt reproof to those who strayed.
127* Those three pure donne from the right-hand wheel
which you saw once were his as baptism,
a thousand years before baptizing came.
130 Predestination! How remote your root
from all those faces that, in looking up,
cannot in toto see the primal cause!
133 And so you mortals, in your judgements show
restraint. For even we who look on God
do not yet know who all the chosen are.

136 Yet this deﬁciency for us is sweet.
For in this good our own good ﬁnds its goal,
that what God wills we likewise seek in will.’
139 So from that sacred sign was given me,
to bring to my short sight new clarity,
a gentle draught of soothing medicine.
142 As good guitarists with good singers make
the string vibrate in answer to the beat,
because of which the song gains more delight,
145 so as it spoke, as I recall to mind,
I saw the lights of those two blessed souls,
concordant as the ﬂickering of our eyes,
148 move at these words the bright sparks of their ﬂames.

CANTO 21

1 Now once again my eyes were ﬁxed upon
my donna’ s countenance, and drawn away,
with all my thoughts, from any other aim.
4* She did not smile. But: ‘If I were to smile,’
so she began, ‘you would become what once
Semele was, when she was turned to ash.
7 For if my beauty (which, as you have seen,
burns yet more brightly as it climbs the stair
that carries us through this eternal hall)
10 were not now tempered, it would shine so clear
that all within your mortal power would be
a sprig, as this ﬂash struck, shaken by thunder.
13* We’re lifted to the seventh splendour now,
which here, beneath the ﬁery Lion’s breast,
combines its rays, in brave strength, with that sign.
16 Fix your mind ﬁrm behind those eyes of yours,
and make them both a mirror for the form
that in this mirror will appear to you.’
19 Whoever knows the pasture, for themselves,
that my eyes grazed on in that blessed sight,
when once I’d altered to that other care,
22 will recognize the pleasure that I took
in bowing down to that celestial guide,
weighing consent against the sight of her.
25* Within the crystal, circling round the world,
which bears the etymon of that dear lord –
under whose sway all evil thoughts lie dead,

28* I saw, as gold in which a ray shines through,
a ladder stretching upwards – and so far –
my eye-lights could not follow where it led.
31 I also saw descending, rung by rung,
so many brilliancies that every ﬂare
the sky displays I thought was ﬂowing down.
34 Compare: by instinct, as the day ﬁrst breaks,
jackdaws will ﬂock and stir their wings as one
to bring some warmth once more to icy plumes.
37 Then some will make away and not return,
while others do go back from where they’d come,
and some will stay and wheel round that same spot.
40 In just that way, these sparks appeared to me,
combining in their scintillating showers
as each one struck upon a certain step.
43* The light, then, tightest at our side, shone out
so clear that, thinking to myself, I said:
‘I see full well what love you show to me.
46 But she from whom I wait to hear the “when”
of silence and of speech, and “how”, stays still.
Against my will, it’s well that I don’t ask.’
49 So she who saw my silence in the sight
of Him who sees the all of everything
said now: ‘Unloose the knot of warm desire.’
52 ‘No merit I may claim,’ so I began,
‘can make me ﬁt to hear what you will say.
But, for the sake of her who lets me ask,
55 make known to me, you happy living soul,
hiding within the heart of your own joy,
the reason you have set yourself so near me.
58 And tell me why the symphony
of Paradise, which sounds in sweet devotion
through the other spheres, is muted in this wheel.’
61 ‘In hearing, you are mortal, as in sight.
So, just as Beatrice does not smile,
likewise,’ he answered me, ‘there’s no song here.

64 I have descended down the holy stair
as far as this to bring you only joy,
with speech and with the light that mantles me.
67 Nor does more love to you make me more quick.
For that same love, and more, seethes upwards here
as all this ﬂaming-out displays to you.
70 But caritas on high that makes us serve
so readily the wisdom of the spheres
allots the places here as you observe.’
73 ‘I truly see,’ I said, ‘O sacred light,
how love – the freedom of this holy court –
is all one needs to trace God’s providence.
76 But this, for me, seems hard to penetrate:
why, among those who share your destiny,
are you alone predestined to this task?’
79 Nor had I reached the last of all these words
when that light took its centre as a hub,
spinning around itself as grindstones do.
82 The love within it then replied to me:
‘Divine light drives its point upon me here.
And, penetrating that in which I’m wombed,
85 its virtue, joined with my own powers of sight,
lifts me so high above myself, I see
on high the essence where that light is milked.
88 Hence comes the brightening joy in which I ﬂame.
Equal to what I see in clarity
is this clear ﬂame that I myself display.
91 But still the soul in Heaven that brightens most –
that seraph with its eye ﬁxed most in God –
could never satisfy your last demand.
94 For what you ask so in-beyonds itself
within the chasm of divine decree,
it’s cut oﬀ wholly from a creature’s sight.
97 And so when you return to mortal things,
bear this with you, so none there may presume
to move their feet to any suchlike aim.

100 Minds that shine here, on earth give oﬀ mere smoke.
So just consider whether those down there
could do what, raised to Heaven, no mind can do.’
103 His words so cut and limited my thoughts
that I gave up the question, holding back,
to ask him, very humbly, who he was.
106* ‘Between the littorals of Italy
not far from your own fatherland, hard rocks
surge up so high the thunder sounds beneath.
109 These form a hunchback ridge called Catria.
Below that lies a consecrated cell
devoted, once, to God’s unending praise.’
112 So he began for me his third address,
and then, continuing: ‘Here I remained
so steadfast in the service of our Lord –
115 oil, simply, of the olive dressed my food –
that I lived lightly through both heat and chill,
contented with contemplative intent.
118 That cloister once would render to the skies
a fertile crop, but now – and this will soon
be all revealed – is hollow, empty, vain.
121* In that place, I was Peter Damian,
and otherwise, within Our Lady’s house,
Peter the Sinner on the Adriatic shore.
124 Little, for me, of mortal life remained
when I was called and forced to wear the gear
that’s handed down, these days, from bad to worse.
127* Once Cephas came – as did that vessel, too,
of Holy Inspiration – shoeless, lean,
taking their meals in any mere hotel.
130 Our modern pastors, though, have put on weight.
They need some propping up on either side,
someone to hoist their backsides up, or lead.
133 The robes they dress in cloak their steeds as well,
so two beasts go within a single skin.
What patience, God! to bear a sight like that.’

136 I saw, as this was said, more little ﬂames,
ascending and revolving, step by step,
more beautiful at every turn they took.
139 They came and circled round this soul, then stopped,
and gave a cry so piercing in its sound
that nothing here on earth could equal it.
142 And, thunderstruck, I did not understand.

CANTO 22

1 Astounded, overwhelmed, I turned to her,
my constant guide, like any little boy
who’ll run to where his greatest trust is found.
4 And rushing there, as mothers always do,
with words to help and set once more to rights
her shocked, pale, sobbing son, she said to me:
7 ‘Do you not know that you’re in Heaven now?
Or know the heavens are holy everywhere,
and all that here is done is done from zeal?
10 Just think of this: how much that song and I,
in smiling, would have wrought in you a change
when you are so much moved by that great cry –
13 in which, if you had understood their prayers,
you might have heard the vengeance clearly sung
that you will come to see before your death.
16 That sword raised here will strike, though not in haste,
nor yet too slow, save only in the view
of those who wait in fear or keen desire.
19 But now turn round to look on other souls.
If, as I ask, you turn your face to these,
you’ll see the shining honour of their hearts.’
22 Once more, as she desired, I turned my eyes,
and saw a hundred bright particular spheres
that all grew lovelier in their mutual rays.
25 So there I stood, like someone driving back
the point of his desire within himself,
not daring out of fear to question more.

28 And now the fullest of those orient pearls,
most brilliant in its lustre, made to come
and make my will content with what it was.
31* Within, I heard: ‘Were you to see, as I,
the caritas that burns among us here,
you would by now have pressed your thoughts to voice.
34 But lest, in pausing, you too long defer
the road to your high goal, I’ll make reply
directly to your thought, since that’s your care.
37 The mountain on whose sides Cassino is
was thickly peopled round its summit once
by tribes, deluded, of a stubborn strain.
40 And I am he who bore ﬁrst to that height
the name of Him who carried down to earth
the truth that bears us to transcendent realms.
43 And grace to that extent shone down on me
that I retrieved the townships all around
from false devotions that seduce the world.
46 These other ﬁres were all contemplatives,
men brightly kindled by the ardent warmth
that brings to birth the holy ﬂowers and fruit.
49* Maccario is here; Romoaldo here.
Here are my brothers, who within the cloister
steadied their steps and kept their hearts entire.’
52 And I to him: ‘The feeling you display
in speaking thus to me, the looks
I note so well-disposed in you, and all these ﬁres, 55 have
caused in me my trust to open wide
as sun does to the rose when this becomes
as fully open as its power can be.
58 Therefore I pray, do, Father, make me sure
that I may come to take such grace that I
might see your face, uncovered, as you are.’
61 At which, he said: ‘Brother, your high desire
will be fulﬁlled within the ﬁnal sphere,
where all desires, as mine too, are fulﬁlled.

64 All our desiring is perfected there,
complete and fruitful in that sphere alone
where every part is where all parts have been.
67 For that is no mere place. It has no pole.
Our ladder, rising, spans across to that,
and therefore steals in ﬂight away from view.
70* Up there, to where its highest part extends,
the Patriarch beheld it all – Jacob
who saw the angels loading all its length.
73 But no one lifts their feet, now, from the earth
to climb those rungs. My Rule remains a waste
of all the vellum that it’s copied on.
76 The walls that once encircled abbey grounds
are turned to dens and lairs. Monastic cowls
are bursting sacks stuﬀed full with rotten ﬂour.
79 But even usury at its worst does not
distract so much from all that God ﬁnds good
as that fruit does, which maddens monks at heart.
82 For everything the Church is there to guard
belongs to those who ask it in God’s name.
It is not meant for kinsmen – worse still, brutes.
85 The ﬂesh of mortals runs to yielding ﬂab.
So good beginnings aren’t enough to last
to acorn time from when the oak is born.
88 Peter began – no silver and no gold! –
as I did, too, with fasting and with prayers.
And Francis built his order on humility.
91 But if you look where each of these began,
and then consider where their track has run,
you’ll see the white original turned dark.
94* And yet, to see the Jordan turning back
or, as God willed, the ocean ﬂee apart
is more miraculous than God’s aid here.’
97 All this he said, and then once more drew back
to join his cell, and that cell tightened in.
And then, as whirlwinds do, it spiralled up.

100* My sweetest lady with a single sign –
the powers she had so vanquished what I was –
drove me to mount the ladder after them.
103 Nor where, in natural terms, we climb or sink
is any motion ever swift enough
to match the speed of what my wings could do.
106 So may I, reader, sometime join once more
that prayerful march of victory (for which
I often weep my sins and beat my breast),
109 you’d not so swiftly have withdrawn and thrust
your ﬁnger in the ﬁre as I ﬁrst saw
the sign that follows Taurus…and was in!
112 You stars in glory! Light enwombing here
those virtuous powers from which, I recognize,
whatever talents that are mine derive,
115 with you, the father of all mortal life
was born, conjoined, then hidden in your span,
when ﬁrst I felt the bite of Tuscan air.
118 And then when, free and wide, grace granted me
high entry to the wheel that turns your sphere,
yours was the region here allotted me.
121 My soul in all devotion breathes to you,
seeking from you the virtue and the strength
to meet the test the heavens now draw it to.
124 ‘You are so close,’ so Beatrice said,
‘to your salvation here that you must keep
the light within your eye acute and clear.
127 And so, before you further “in” yourself,
look down and wonder at how great a world
already you have set beneath your feet,
130 so that your heart may show itself, as full
as it may be, to this triumphant throng
that rings in happiness the ethereal round.’
133 I turned about to look once more through all
the seven spheres and, seeing there the globe,
I smiled to ﬁnd how small and cheap it seemed.

136 I thoroughly approve as best the thought
that earth is least. Those, then, who set their minds on
other things are known as right and able.
139* I saw, on ﬁre, the daughter of Latona,
free of the shadow that had made me once
believe the moon to be both rare and dense.
142* I now could bear, Hyperion, the look
of your bright son. I saw there movements, too –
Dione, Maia – that were circling near.
145 And there, between his sire and son, appeared
the tempering inﬂuence of Jupiter
and, clear to view, the varying ‘where’ of each.
148 And all these seven spheres displayed to me
their magnitude, their speed, the distance, too,
that lay between the dwelling place of each.
151 That little threshing ﬂoor that makes men ﬁerce,
myself now turning with the eternal Twins,
was seen entire – to river-mouths from hills.
154 My eyes I then turned back to her ﬁne eyes.

CANTO 23

1 Compare: a bird, among her well-loved boughs,
has rested all night long while things lie hid,
poised where her dear brood sleeps within their nest; 4
and then, to glimpse the looks she’s longed to see,
and ﬁnd the food her ﬂedglings feed upon
(these eﬀorts weigh with her as pure delight)
7 before dawn comes she mounts an open sprig,
and there, her heart ablaze, awaits the sun,
eyes sharpening, ﬁxed, till day is truly born.
10* So, too, head raised, tall, straight, my donna stood,
attention wholly on that stretch of sky
where, under noon, the sun displays least speed.
13 And I, to see her stand enraptured so,
became like one desiring still what he
has not – and yet in hope is satisﬁed.
16 But little time went by between these two –
I mean my waiting, and my seeing now
the skies that, brightening still, grew yet more bright.
19 And ‘Look!’ said Beatrice. ‘Triumphing,
the soldiery of Christ, and all the yield,
brought from the orbit of the farthest spheres!’
22 Her face, it seemed to me, now burned so bright,
her eyes so ﬁlled with utmost happiness,
that I must needs pass on and frame no word.
25* As in the calm, clear skies of moonlit nights,
tri-form Diana smiles (eternal nymphs,
around her, paint all Heaven’s curving spheres),

28 above a thousand lanterns or still more,
I saw one sun that, soaring, lit them all,
as our sun lights the stars seen over us.
31 And through this clear and living light there shone
the being that creates that glow, too bright
within my eyes for me to tolerate.
34 My sweetness! Beatrice, guiding me!
She spoke: ‘This power that overcomes your sight
is one from which no shelter can be sought.
37* Here is all wisdom, and the strength that cleared
the open road that runs from Heaven to earth,
for which so long was once such deep desire.’
40 As bolts of ﬁre, unlocked from thunder clouds,
expand beyond containment in those bounds,
then fall to ground (as ﬁre, by nature, can’t),
43 so, too, surrounded by this solemn feast,
my own mind, grown the greater now, went forth
and can’t remember what it then became.
46 ‘Open your eyes and look at what I am!
You have seen things by which you’re made so strong, you
can, now, bear to look upon my smile.’
49 I was like one whose waking sense returns
yet strives in vain – his dreaming now oblivion –
to bring once more that vision back to mind,
52* as I now heard that utterance which deserves
a gratitude that never should be dimmed
from that great book that tells of things long past.
55* Even if all those voices were to sound
that Polyhymnia and her sister muses
fed on their sweetest milk so richly once,
58 and aid me, singing of that holy smile
and how her holy look grew purer still,
I’d still not reach one thousandth of the truth.
61 And so, imagining this Paradise,
the sacred epic has to make a leap,
as when we ﬁnd the road ahead cut oﬀ.

64 Yet no one if they’ve gauged that weighty theme –
and seen what mortal shoulders bear the load –
would criticize such trembling backing-out.
67 The waves that my adventurous prow here cleaves
are no mere sea-loch that some skiﬀ might cross,
or helmsmen lacking in the proper skill.
70 ‘Why is it that my face in-loves you so
that you don’t turn to see the garden where,
beneath Christ’s rays, such beauty is en-ﬂowered?
73* The rose in which the Word of God became
our ﬂesh is here. And here those ﬂeurs-de-lys
whose perfume marks the path we rightly tread.’
76 So, Beatrice. And I, quick to read
whatever she might counsel, gave myself
to battle, feeble though my eyelids were.
79 My eyes have seen at times – though wrapped in shade –
a ray of limpid sunlight, ﬁltering
through broken cloud, across a ﬁeld of ﬂowers.
82 So here I saw a swirling crowd of splendours
ﬂung out like thunderbolts down burning beams,
and could not see from where these ﬂashes came.
85 You, Generous Strength! You leave your imprint here.
To open this arena to my eyes (powerless
to see You otherwise) You rose on high.
88 The naming of that lovely ﬂower which I,
at dawn and evening, call upon, compelled
my mind to face in full the greatest ﬁre.
91 And as my eyes, together, now portrayed
the scope and nature of that bright, live star,
victorious there, victorious here below,
94 straight through the skies another torch came down
spun in a circle, as a crown might be,
and formed a ring around her, turning there.
97 The sweetest melody that sounds on earth,
or that which most attracts the soul to it,
would seem like cloud ripped wide by thunder claps

100 when heard beside the sounding of that lyre
whose notes now crowned the lovely sapphire-stone,
through whom the skies en-sapphire clearer still.
103 ‘I am the angel-love called Gabriel,
encircling here the height of joy that breathes
around the womb our Longed-for sheltered in.
106* Lady of Heaven, I shall spin these turns
till, in procession, you, behind your son,
make the High Sphere, on entering, more divine.’
109 And so the perfect circling of that tune
sealed its conclusion, while the other lights
rang out the sound of Maria’s name.
112 The regal surcoat of those rolling spheres
that form our universe, alive with stars,
all shimmering at the breathing of God’s rule
115 now stretched its inner shore so far above
that nothing of it showed from where I was,
no glimpse of that First Mover came to view.
118 Therefore my eyes could not command the power
to follow as that ﬂame, within its crown,
rose up so close behind the seed she’d borne.
121 A baby, suckling, once it’s full of milk,
will hold its arms out wide towards its mum
to make known outwardly its inner ﬂame.
124 So, at their incandescent peaks, these gleams
stretched up. And this, to me, made clear what depths of
heartfelt love they bore towards Maria.
127* But all remained there, still within my sight,
singing in such sweet tones ‘Regina coeli’
delight at that will never leave my heart.
130 What richness, what abundance now well-stored
within such overﬂowing barns – which were
good husbandmen who sowed the seed below.
133* Here life is lived rejoicing in that hoard,
gained ever weeping in the exile years
of Babylon, when gold was put aside.

136* And here beneath the most exalted Son
of God and Mary, in His victory,
with all the new and all the ancient court,

CANTO 24

1 ‘You chosen confrères of the Blessèd Lamb
who feeds you at his solemn feast so well
that you are full in all you wish and will,
4 if this man here should taste, by grace of God,
the crumbs and morsels falling from your board
before his death prescribes for him due time,
7 direct your mind to his unmeasured zeal.
Let dew refresh him for a while. You drink
that spring for ever where his thought derives.’
10 Thus Beatrice. And those happy souls
became like spheres revolving round ﬁxed points,
ﬂaming in spinning turns as comets do.
13* The well-tuned wheels of gold chronometers
will seem (to those who check) to whirl in gear,
the ﬁrst cog steady and the last in ﬂight.
16 So, too, with all their measures swirling diﬀerently,
they, dancing, let me estimate
the riches – slow or rapid – each possessed.
19 Then, from the one I’d marked of dearer worth,
I saw a ﬁre ﬂare out with so much joy
that none now left behind it was so clear.
22 Three times it circled Beatrice round,
the song it sang too deeply divinized
for my imagination to recount.
25 And so my pen will leap, and I’ll not write.
Such pictures as we form – and words, of course –
are far too garish for those subtle pleats.

28 ‘My holy sister. You have prayed for this
with such devotion and such ardent prayers
that you unloose me from that lovely sphere.’
31 Then, when that blessèd ﬁre had come to rest,
it breathed directly to my lady there
in words of ﬁre, as I have spoken them.
34 And she: ‘Eternal light of that great man
to whom Our Lord bequeathed the keys (which He
ﬁrst bore below) of this high jubilation,
37 try him, as you may please, on any point –
weighty or light – in matters of that Faith
by which you came to walk across the sea.
40 Whether he loves, believes and has good hope,
cannot be secret. For your eyes here turn
where all things are depicted, clear to see.
43 But since this realm has gained its citizens
through one true faith, it’s good that he should come and
speak of that, to glorify its name.’
46* Compare: at vivas students hold their ﬁre
until, to test and not conclude the proof,
professors lay their questions out to them.
49 So I, while she was speaking, armed myself
with every argument, to be prepared
for questions, and professions of my own.
52 ‘Tell me, good Christian (and make clear you are ):
what is this faith?’ At which, towards the light
from which he breathed these words, I raised my brow, 55
then turned to Beatrice. Quick in glance,
she urged me, from my deepest inward source,
that I should pour these spreading waters out.
58 ‘Let grace, which grants that I confess my faith
to you, the noblest of centurions,
make,’ I began, ‘my thoughts be well expressed.’
61* And next: ‘As written by the truthful pen,
Father, of your dear brother Paul, who set,
with you, great Rome upon its rightful track:

64 “Faith is substantial to the things we hope,
the evidence of things we do not see.”
And such, in essence, I believe it is.’
67 And then I heard: ‘You understand aright –
so long as you can tell why he classed faith
as “substance” ﬁrst, and then as “evidence”.’
70 I followed on: ‘All those deep mysteries
which here so freely show themselves to me
are, to the eyes of those down there well hid,
73* so what they are lies wholly in belief,
on which is posited the highest hope.
Faith, for that reason, falls in substance class.
76 And we are bound to form, from that belief –
with nothing seen beyond – sound arguments.
It’s therefore classed as evidence as well.’
79 And now I heard: ‘If everything down there,
wrung out of doctrine, were so understood,
there’d be no room for showy sophistries.’
82 This breathed from that enkindled love. And then,
‘In alloy,’ he went on, ‘and legal weight,
the coin you produce has passed assay.
85 But tell me, have you got it in your purse?’
At which, ‘I have!’ I said. ‘Yes! Round and bright.
Nothing in how it’s minted p’rhapses me.’
88 And then came ﬂowing from that deepest light
which there shone out: ‘That precious gem of joy
in which all other virtues ﬁnd their ground –
91 whence does that come to you?’ And I: ‘The rain
(so generous!) of the Holy Ghost that ﬂows
between the leathered texts, both old and new,
94 in logic is, I think, conclusively
so sharp a proof that, when compared with that,
all formal arguments appear obtuse.’
97 I heard then: ‘All these premises, both old
and new, that bring you to conclude this, why
are these, you think, the light of holy tongues?’

100 And I: ‘The proof, for me, that unlocks truth
is found in deeds that followed from that faith.
Nature can’t heat or hammer steel like that.’
103* ‘But say,’ came this riposte, ‘who gave to you
assurance of these deeds? That very Book
asserted this which still, itself, needs proof.’
106 ‘Suppose the world had turned to Christian faith
without these miracles,’ I said, ‘then that
would be a hundred times the miracle.
109 For you were poor and needy in the ﬁeld,
when you went out to sow this fertile crop.
Once there were vines where now are only thorns.’
112 When this was done, the holy court on high
echoed through all the spheres its ‘God be praised!’
sung to the melodies they sing up there.
115 That lord who, in examining my work,
had drawn me out, then onward branch to branch
(so that we now drew near the last, fresh leaves)
118 once more began: ‘The play of grace that woos
your mind has opened up, till now, your lips
exactly as it’s right to open them.
121 So, what emerged I seal and certify.
But now you need to say what you believe,
and say what source ﬁrst gave this faith to you.’
124* ‘Most Holy Father, Spirit who now sees
what once you so believed that you outdid
the younger feet that ran towards the grave’
127 (thus I began) ‘you’d have me now make plain
the formal essence of my ready faith,
seeking as well its rationale and cause.
130 I answer: I believe in one true God,
sole and eternal who, Himself not moved,
moves all the spheres by love and with desire.
133* For this belief I have – beside those proofs
that physics gives, and metaphysics, too –
the truth that comes to me, as rain from here,

136 through Moses, through the prophets and the psalms,
through Gospel writings and the words you wrote
when once the ardent Spirit raised you high.
139 And I believe in three eternal persons,
believing these one substance, one and three,
to whom, grammatically, apply both “is” and “are”.
142 This deep condition of divinity,
which I here note, is many times impressed
by Gospel teachings on my intellect.
145 This doctrine is the origin, the spark
that spreads to light the living ﬂame,
which ﬂashes out in me as stars in heaven.’
Like some great man, who, pleased with what he hears,
148
rejoicing at his servant’s news, will ﬂing
his arms, as silence falls, around his neck,
151 so, singing as its blessings fell on me,
three times – my words now mute – it circled me,
the light of that apostle at whose will
154 I’d spoken thus, the speech had pleased it so.

CANTO 25

1* If ever it should happen that this sacred work,
to which both Earth and Heaven have set their hands,
(making me over many years grow gaunt)
4 might overcome the cruelty that locks me out
from where I slept, a lamb in that ﬁne fold,
the enemy of wolves that war on it,
7 with altered ﬂeece, with altered voice, I shall
return as poet, taking, at my fount
of baptism, the laurel for my crown.
10 For I ﬁrst entered there within the faith
that makes us known, in soul, to God, and then,
for that same faith, Saint Peter ringed my brow.
13* Towards us now there moved a light
drawn from the sphere where that ﬁrst fruit of all the
ministers of Christ had issued out.
16 And, ﬁlled with happiness, my lady said:
‘Look there! The wonder of it! Look! The Lord
for whom the pilgrims travel to Galicia.’
19 Compare: a dove will settle by its mate
and, each to each, both turning, murmuring,
make proclamation of the love they feel.
22 So, too, I saw in glory each great prince
made welcome, each by each, in that high realm,
praising alike the feast at which they sat.
25* But when their greetings reached their formal end,
they stood in silence ﬁrmly coram me ,
their sudden ﬁre defeating my turned eyes.

28 And smiling, Beatrice now spoke out:
‘You living excellence! Your written scrolls
record the spacious giving of our hall.
31* Make hope now echo in these generous heights.
You well know how. Whenever Jesus graced
his favoured three, you ﬁgured hope from that.’
34 ‘Raise your head high and gather conﬁdence.
For all that rises from your mortal world
will grow to ripeness in these rays of ours.’
37 Such comfort reached me from the second ﬁre.
I therefore raised my eyes towards the hills,
which ﬁrst had bowed them down too heavily.
40 ‘Because our Emperor in grace desires
that you, before your death, should come to greet
his nobles in these secret audience rooms –
43 so that, once truth is seen in this high court,
the hope that stirs you in good love down there
may gather strength in you and others, too –
46 say what hope is, and how, within your mind,
it comes to ﬂower, and how it came to you.’
The second light, in this way, followed on.
49 And she who guided, in all holiness,
the pinions of my wings to ﬂy so high
answered, before I could myself, with this:
52 ‘The Church, at war on earth, has not a child –
and this is written in that Sun whose rays
here shine upon our ranks – more full of hope.
55* It has, therefore, been granted him to come,
before his term of soldiership is through,
from Egypt to behold Jerusalem.
58 The next two points at which your questions strike –
seeking not knowledge but that he report
how greatly hope, as virtue, pleases you –
61 I leave to him. These won’t prove diﬃcult,
and yet won’t tempt him into mere display.
Let him reply. May God’s grace bear him on.’

64 A bright, keen student who has done his work
is quick to answer to his lecturer’s hint,
and thus disclose to her how good he is.
67* ‘Hope is sure expectation,’ I declared,
‘of glory that will come. The grace of God
and precedent good works produce this power.
70 From many stars its light comes down to me.
But David ﬁrst instilled it in my heart,
that highest singer of the highest Lord.
73 “Let those have hope in you who know His name.”
So David, in his psalmody, sings out.
And who cannot know that who shares my faith?
76 Then you in your epistle – as with drops
of dew – distilled my hopes. So I am full,
and rain your cooling shower on other lives.’
79* While I spoke on, within the living breast
of that ﬁerce blaze, repeated tremors ﬂashed,
as rapid as in any lightning storm.
82* ‘The love by which,’ it breathed, ‘I still am ﬁred
towards that virtue which came with me till
I won the martyr’s palm and left the ﬁeld,
85 wills that, to you who take the same delight,
I breathe once more. My pleasure is: you say
what promises your hope has made to you.’
88 And I: ‘The Scriptures, both the old and new,
deﬁne and indicate that goal for me:
the friendship God concludes with certain souls.
91* Isaiah says that each, in his own land,
will be arrayed in two-fold vestiture.
And “his own land” is here, this sweetest life.
94 And yet more fully your own brother makes
this revelation clear to us. He speaks
(in the Apocalypse) of pure white dress.’
Then, ﬁrst, when once these words had reached their 97
end,
‘Sperent in te’ above us could be heard,

and all the circling choirs replied to that.
100* And then, amid them all, one light shone clear.
(Were such a crystal held in star sign Crab,
winter would have a month of sunlit day.)
103 Young girls will rise light-heartedly and go
to join in dancing and (so far from shame)
intend an honour to the newly-wed.
106 So I saw now that ever-clearer gleam
approach the two who spun to their own notes
in keeping with the ardour of their love.
109 This set itself within the wheeling song.
My lady kept her eyes ﬁxed ﬁrm on these,
as silent as a bride, as motionless.
112* ‘He is the one who lay upon the breast
of Christ, our Pelican. And he it was
elected, at the Cross, for one great task.’
115 My lady spoke, and yet she did not cease,
before or after, to maintain her gaze
where ﬁrst it was, attentively, so ﬁxed.
118 Like someone peering, doing all he can,
to see some moment of the sun’s eclipse,
who, seeing, grows unseeing all the more,
121* so I became, as this last ﬁre appeared,
while words were said: ‘Why dazzle your strained eyes to
see things in this place that cannot be?
124 My body lies as earth in earth, and shall
(as others shall) until our numbers mount
to equal what’s eternally decreed.
127* Two lights alone have risen in both robes –
in soul and body – to this cloistered joy.
You’ll carry word of this to your own tribe.’
130 As this was said, the ﬂaming wheel grew still,
as did the lovely mingling of those sounds
that formed within that breathing three-in-one.
133 (Compare: to put an end to strain or risk,
oars that repeatedly had struck the waves

all stop the moment that the whistle sounds.)
136 Ah! What great turmoil in my mind to turn,
thinking to see where Beatrice was,
and yet not see – although so near to her,
139 despite my being in that happy sphere.

CANTO 26

1* As I stood wavering, all seeing gone,
out of the ﬂashing ﬂame that quenched my sight
a breathing stirred that won my whole attention,
4 saying: ‘While you have yet to re-awaken
the sense of sight that spent itself in me,
it’s good that you, with words, should compensate.
7 Begin, then. Say what point the soul of you
is aiming at, and know, with reason, that your powers of
sight, blurred and confused, are not extinct.
10* The lady who now leads you through this godlike realm has, in the glance she gives to you,
the power that lay in Ananias’ hand.’
13 ‘As now or later pleases her,’ I said,
‘may healing fall upon these eyes – the gates
through which she came with ﬁres I burn from still.
16* In every text that Love reads out to me –
voiced low or strong – the Alpha and Omega is
the Good that brings content to all this court.’
19 The voice that ﬁrst had freed me from my fear
when that bedazzlement had struck my eyes
now sharpened my concern to speak once more.
22 It said to me: ‘You must, for certain, clear
in thought a stricter path. You need to tell
who is it aims your bow towards its mark.’
25 And I: ‘By reasons in philosophy,
as by those Scriptures that descend from here,
Love, of necessity, is stamped in me.

28 For good per se , once recognized as good,
sets love on ﬁre – the ﬁercer still as love
holds more of good within its proper self.
31 Towards that essence, then (which holds such sway
that any good that’s found beyond its reach
is nothing save a beam of that one ray),
34 the mind, in loving, will more rightly move
than elsewhere – or those minds, at least, that see the
truth on which this demonstration stands.
37* To my own mind that truth is ﬁrst proclaimed
by one who demonstrates the primal love
of all the sempiternal forms of life.
40 Proclaimed as well by our true Font and Rule,
Who, speaking of Himself, to Moses said:
“I shall indeed ensure you see all good.”
43 Proclaimed, no less, by you in your ﬁrst lines –
that trumpet call that shouted the arcane
clearer than any fanfare down from here.’
46 And then I heard: ‘Through human intellect,
and through authorities well-tuned to thought,
the highest of your loves looks up to God.
49 But say, as well, what other ropes you feel
that draw you to Him and so, too, sound forth
how many teeth love’s cog wheel bites you with.’
52 Nothing lay hidden in the holy mind
of Christ’s great Eagle. And I saw at once
where he meant my avowals to advance.
55 So I began: ‘As many ratchet-teeth
as ever turn the human heart to God,
all run as one with my own charity.
58 My being, and the being of the world,
the death that He sustained so I might live,
the hope that all, with me, confess in faith,
61 the living knowledge I have spoken of –
all drew me from the waves of wrongful love
and set me on the shores of righteousness.

64* And every leaf, en-leaﬁng all the grove
of our eternal orchardist, I love
as far as love is borne to them from Him.’
67* As I fell silent, through the sky there rang
the sweetest song – my lady and these souls
all saying now the ‘Holy, Holy, Holy’.
70 A piercing light will startle us from sleep –
eye-pulses racing as they meet the glare
that passes through the lens from skirt to skirt – 73 and,
shocked awake, we muddle what we see,
a blank, mere nescience, at this alert,
until our faculties restore their aid.
76 So, too, the eyes of Beatrice shone –
their ray would reach a thousand miles or more –
routing the maculae that tainted mine.
79 I saw now better than I had before.
And, all but stunned, I asked who that light was,
appearing as the fourth amongst us there.
82 My donna answered me: ‘Within those rays,
the Maker looks with love upon the ﬁrst
of souls that primal power had ever formed.’
85 As fresh-leaved branches, when a breeze goes by,
bend at their tip, and then – through inner strength which
points them high – will straighten once again, 88 so I
did, swaying, wavering at her words,
to be re-made, complete in conﬁdence
that ﬂowed from my own burning urge to speak.
91 ‘You are the single apple,’ I began,
‘produced as full and ripe. In kin and law,
to you all brides are daughters, ﬁrst of men.
94 I beg, with all the reverence I can bring,
that you should speak to me. You know my will.
And so – to hear you sooner – I’ll not say.’
97 A beast will sometimes wriggle in a sack,
and so display the feelings that it has
from how the wrapping follows what it does.

100 In that same way, the ﬁrst of human souls
made me see clearly, through his covering,
how light of heart he was to meet my will.
103 And then he breathed: ‘Without your oﬀering,
I understand what you desire to know
better than you know all you hold most sure.
106 I see this shining truly in the glass
that holds the pure pareil of other things,
and yet in nothing ﬁnds its parallel.
109 You wish to hear how long God had me stay
within that garden rising to the heights
where she, your donna , set you on this stair;
112 how long that garden gave my eye delight,
and what the reason was for God’s ﬁerce scorn,
and what the language was I formed and used.
115* My dearest son, the tasting of the tree
was not itself the cause of banishment,
but rather our transgression of the mark.
118 From where your donna once sent Virgil out,
four thousand revolutions of the sun,
two hundred more then two, I craved this court.
121 I’d seen the sun, with all its lights, return
along the starry road, nine hundred times
then thirty, in the years I passed on earth.
124 The language that I spoke was wholly spent
before the tribe of Nimrod set their minds
on work that could not, ever, reach fulﬁlment.
127 For nothing that our natural powers eﬀect
(since human pleasures, as the years pass by,
are always new) was ever durable.
130 It’s Nature’s work that human beings speak.
But whether thus or thus, man’s nature leaves
to you to fashion as you may best please.
133* Before I sank to Hell’s deep agonies,
the Highest Good – from which derives the joy
I’m swathed in here – was known on earth as “I”.

136 Then afterwards we called it El. Needs must.
With mortal usages, like leaves along
a branch, one goes and then another comes.
139* On that mount rising highest from the sea
I was – in pure, and then dishonoured, life –
from when the ﬁrst hour dawns until the hour
142 that follows, as the sun moves zone, the sixth.’

CANTO 27

1 ‘To Father and Son and the Holy Ghost,
glory on high!’ all Heaven here began,
till I, at that sweet song, reeled drunkenly.
4 And what I saw, it seemed, was now the laughter
of all the universe. So drunkenness, for me,
came in through hearing and, no less, through sight.
7 The joy of that! The happiness beyond all words!
A life of peace and love, entire and whole!
Riches all free of craving, troubleless!
10 The faces of the four before my eyes
were bright with ﬁre. That soul (the ﬁrst who came) began
to grow more brilliant still at this.
13* And now, in how it looked, this face became
what Jove would be if he and Mars were birds,
and both exchanged their plumage, white for red.
16 The providence that makes division here
of duties, tasks and oﬃces imposed
a perfect silence on the holy choir.
19 And then I heard: ‘If I change colour now,
don’t be amazed at that. For all of these,
as I go on, you’ll see change colour, too.
22* He who on earth has robbed me of my place,
my place, my place – which therefore, in the sight
of God’s dear Son, stands vacant now – has made
25 of my own burial ground a shit hole
reeking of blood and pus. In this the sod
who fell from here down there takes sheer delight.’

28* With that same colour that a cloud takes on,
morning or evening, when it meets the sun,
I saw, in every part, the heavens ﬂush.
31 And as some innocent – herself quite clean
in conscience – when she notes another’s fault
may still, on hearing this, grow chaste and shy,
34 so Beatrice changed in countenance.
So, too, I think the heavens were once eclipsed
when Utmost Power submitted to the Cross.
37 And then Saint Peter’s words went on, his voice
transformed so utterly from what it was
that he, in look, could not have been more changed.
40* ‘The Bride of Christ was not brought forth and raised
on blood of mine – of Linus, too, and Cletus –
to be made use of in pursuit of gold,
43 but rather, to pursue here living joy,
Sixtus and Pius, Urban, Calixtus,
after harsh tears all shed their blood for this.
46* We did not mean that some of Christ’s own race
should sit in favour on our heirs’ right hand,
and others, to the left, incur disgrace;
49 nor that the keys entrusted to my hands
should serve as battle emblem on the ﬂag
that fought against those marked by baptism;
52 nor that, myself, I should become the stamp
that seals the sale of untrue privilege.
I ﬂare and redden often at this thought.
55 Down there, in every pasture, ravening wolves
are seen dressed up as shepherds and as priests.
God our defence, why are you still unmoved?
58* Gascons along with bankers from Cahors
prepare themselves to drink our martyr blood.
To what corrupted ends good starts may sink!
61* But Providence on high that made defence
through Scipio at Rome of this world’s fame
will soon, as I conceive it, oﬀer aid.

64 And you, my son, whose body weighs you down
so you’ll return below, speak openly
and do not hide what I don’t hide from you.’
67* When sun and Goat Horn touch as winter signs,
the air in our terrestrial atmosphere
ﬂoats down in falls of frozen vapour ﬂakes.
70 So now I saw, with upward sweeping ﬂakes,
the aether decked in those triumphant airs
that ﬁrst had passed their time with us below.
73 My eyes, in following these semblances,
followed until the space between became
so great it took away sight’s power to pass.
76 At which my lady, seeing me absolved
from all attention to the heights, now said:
‘Now sink your gaze, and see how far you’ve turned.’
79* I saw that since the time I’d ﬁrst looked down
I’d moved in those six hours through all the arc,
mid-point to end, the ﬁrst zone makes on earth,
82 so that I saw, beyond Cadiz, the mad
sea-jaunt of Ulysses and, east, the shore
where soft Europa once was borne away.
85 And more still of that eastward threshing ﬂoor
would have been shown me but, beneath my feet,
the sun, processing, reached a farther sign.
88 My mind, so deep in love that always woos,
as donna , my donna , burned more ﬁercely still
to turn its eyes once more to where she was.
91 Though art or nature, to possess our minds,
may, in its paintings or in ﬂesh itself,
produce beguiling pastures for our eyes,
94 these all would seem as nothing when compared
with that divine delight which shone on me
when I turned round to see her smiling look.
97* The inward powers her glance bestowed on me,
uprooting me from Leda’s lovely nest,
impelled me to the swiftest of the skies.

100 Its regions so exalted, living bright,
are all so uniform I cannot say
which Beatrice chose to be my place.
103 But she, who saw the strength of my desire,
laughing with such great happiness
that God appeared rejoicing in her face:
106 ‘The order in the natural spheres that stills
the central point and moves, round that, all else,
here sets its conﬁne and begins its rule.
109 This primal sphere has no “where” other than
the mind of God. The love that makes it turn
is kindled there, so, too, the powers it rains.
112 Brightness and love contain it in one ring,
as this, in turn, contains the spheres below.
And only He who binds it knows the bond.
115 Its motion is not gauged by other marks.
All other marks are measured out from this –
as ten is factored by its half and ﬁfth.
118 So now it will be clear to you how Time
takes root within the humus of this bowl,
and shows its fronds in every other part.
121* Crass, itching greed! You plunge our mortal sense
so far within your depth that none can drag
their eyes above the mounting turbulence!
124 Intention blossoms well in human hearts.
But rain, unending rain, will render down
the true, ripe plum to shrivelled pods of blight.
127 Good faith and innocence are only found
in infant schools. And both will long have ﬂed
before the cheek is covered with a beard.
130 There’s one kid, burbling still, awaiting food,
who when he’s ﬂuent in his speech will gorge
on every dish, beneath whatever moon.
133 There’s one there (burbling, too) who loves his mum
and heeds her words, who, when his tongue grows whole,
will long to see her buried in her grave.

136* And so the whitest skin is scorched pitch black
merely to glimpse the lovely child of him
who brings the dawn and leaves behind the dark.
139 And you – so you should not suppose this strange –
think that on earth there’s no one who will rule,
and so the human family goes astray.
142* But those neglected hundredths in our dates
will make of January a spring-song month
before these circling heights send down such rays
145 that storms of fortune, so long waited for,
will spin the stern to where the prow is now,
so all the ﬂeet will run a proper course,
148 and fruit will follow truly from the ﬂower.’

CANTO 28

1 In contradiction of the life now led
in mortal misery, she – the in-paradizer
of my mind – had thus laid open Truth to me.
4 Then, as in mirrors, when the light’s behind,
we see, although in sight and thought we’ve yet
to grasp the fact, the ﬂame of some twin torch
7 (so turn around to see if that smooth glass
has told the truth and see it does accord,
as words in song when sung upon their beat),
10 so too did I – my memory now records –
still looking back towards those lovely eyes,
from which, to snare me, love had made the cord.
13 And once I’d turned – and once my eyes were touched
by what appears within that scroll to those
who look aright within its turning sphere –
16* a single point I saw, that shot out rays
so sharp the eye on which it ﬁxes ﬁre
is bound to close against that needle-strength.
19 Even the star that, seen from here, seems least
would seem, when set beside that point (as star
is set by star), a moon in magnitude.
22 As close as, perhaps, coronae appear
around the lights that shape and colour them
when halo-bearing vapours are most dense,
25 around that point, to similar extent,
ﬁre in a circle whirled at such great speed
its motion would surpass all clasped round earth.

28 This was, in orbit, bounded by the next,
by that, a third, the third, then, by a fourth,
by ﬁve that four, and then by six that ﬁve.
31 Then, round all these, a seventh ran, so stretched
to generous breadth that Juno’s messenger,
the rainbow arc, would hardly hold the all.
34 Likewise, the eighth and ninth. And each of these
moved still more slowly as the count went on,
running, in number, outward from the one.
37 And that possessed the clearest ﬂame of all
from which the purest spark stood least far oﬀ,
because, I think, that ﬂame in-truthed the most.
40 My lady, seeing me caught up in hard
concerns, spoke out: ‘From that one point
depends both Heaven and all of Nature’s world.
43 Look, in pure wonder, at that circle joined
most nearly to the point, and know it moves
so fast impelled in point of burning love.’
46 ‘Suppose the universe,’ I said to her,
‘were ordered as I see these wheels to be,
then I would rest well fed with your proposal.
49 But in the realm of sense experience
the orbits, we can see, are more divine
when these stand furthest from the earth’s mid-core.
52 And so if, in this temple, set apart,
its conﬁnes marked by love and light alone,
my own desires will ever reach their end,
55 I need to hear how type and prototype
are not conﬁgured in a single mode.
For that I contemplate quite fruitlessly.’
58 ‘It’s hardly any miracle if you,
with your own hands, cannot untie that knot.
It’s got so stiﬀ since no one works at it!’
61 These were my lady’s words. And then: ‘Just get
what I’ll now tell you if you want your ﬁll,
and sharpen thought to subtlety round that.

64 The circling of these bodies, wide or strict,
follow proportioned to the power that ﬂows
diﬀused in all their parts, here more, here less.
67 A greater goodness means a greater health.
A greater health is held in greater limbs,
if these, throughout, are perfect equally.
70 Therefore this sphere – the Primum Mobile –
which draws the universe entire along
answers the circle that most loves and knows.
73 And so if, with your rule, you compass round
the virtue and the strength of what these are,
and not their look, which shows as circular,
76 you’ll see a wonderful coincidence –
according to intelligence in every sphere –
between the less and least, greater and more.’
79* Compare: when Boreas, the northern wind,
blows from his milder cheek, our hemisphere
is left serene, its air bright, sparkling, clear.
82 The crusted scum of clouds that swirled there ﬁrst
is freed and clariﬁed. The whole sky laughs.
Its many beauties smile round every steeple.
85 So I became, as – caring for my good –
my lady answered with such clarity,
and truth was seen as stars are in the sky.
88 And when these words of hers had come to rest,
then, as when boiling iron sparks and spurts,
so, too, these circles ﬂung oﬀ their own sparks.
91* This surge of ﬁre was following every glint.
These glints, en-thousanding, outnumbered far
progressive doubling of the chessboard squares.
94* And rising, choir to choir, I heard ‘Hosanna’
sung to that point which, ﬁxed there, holds them all, and
always will, ubi they’ve always been.
97 And seeing in my mind what doubts I had,
she now declared: ‘The circles that I ﬁrst
made known are Cherubim and Seraphim.

100 Each runs so swiftly round its twining hoop,
to be as like that point as possible,
succeeding, through sublimity of sight.
103 And round these run those other forms of love,
known as the Thrones, receiving God’s regard.
With these, the ﬁrst of triads terminates.
106 And all, as you must know, have their delight
according to how deep their sight goes down
into the truth that calms all intellect.
109* You’ll see from this that being truly blessed
resides upon the act by which we see,
and not in act of love. This follows that.
112 And seeing takes its measure from the worth
that grace and truest purpose bring to birth.
And so the scale proceeds from step to step.
115* The second triad where the sap thus ﬂows
within this sempiternal springtime season –
which night-ascendant Aries never spoils –
118 sings out perpetually that winter’s done,
“Osanna!” in three tunes that sound in three
orders of happiness, each one en-threeing here.
121 The other gods in this hierarchic rank
are ﬁrstly Dominations, Virtues next,
then, thirdly, there’s the Order of the Powers.
124 In three-some reels the two penultimates
are Principalities, Archangels, too.
The last of all is all Angelic games.
127 This order all in wonder gaze above
and triumph so, beneath, that up to God
they all are drawn and draw up all to all.
130* And Dionysius with such desire
set out to contemplate these nine-fold ranks
that he deﬁned and named them as I do.
133 But Gregory departed from his view.
And so, the moment that he reached this sphere,
opening his eyes, he laughed, self-mockingly.

136 And if, on earth, a mortal could display
a truth so secret, please don’t be amazed.
This was revealed by one who saw up here –
139 and much else of truth of these great gyres.’

CANTO 29

1* When moon and sun, the children of Latona,
covered by Libra and the spring-starred Ram,
each takes, to form its belt, the same horizon,
4 the length of time from when the zenith comes
to equipoise to when these two, in change
of hemisphere, unbalance in that zone,
7 was all the time that Beatrice stayed
silent – her laughter brushed across her face,
ﬁxed on the point that ﬁrst defeated me.
10 Then she began: ‘I’ll say – though ask, I won’t –
what you now want to hear. I’ve seen it there
where every “when” and “where” attains its point.
13* Not seeking any good that He had not –
there can be none – but so his shining-out
could in return shine back and say: “I am”,
16 in His eternity beyond all time,
beyond our understanding, as He pleased,
to new loves Love Eternal opened out.
19 Nor had He lain in torpor till that time,
for neither “then” nor “now” could come before
the ﬂowing-forth of God above these waves.
22 Real form and matter (both conjoined and pure),
issued in being where there was no ﬂaw,
as from a three-string bow three arrows ﬂy.
25 Light rays that enter amber, crystal, glass,
display such luminescence that, from when
they reach, then are there wholly, there’s no pause.

28 Likewise, the three-fold action of light’s lord
shone brightly through all being, all as one,
without distinction in that opening word.
31 Rank and relationship were co-create
with these true beings who, within the world
(pure act produced in them), stand at the height
34 where, at the lowest, there’s pure potency,
between these two an intertwining binds
pure potency to act – and never disentwines.
37* Jerome proposed to you a long elapse
of centuries of angels from creation’s point
before the other world was ever formed.
40 The truth is written, though, in many parts –
by writers listening to the Holy Ghost –
as you, if you look carefully, will see.
43 And even reason can see some of this,
refusing to concede that motive-powers
should be so long without full carry-through.
46 And now you know the where and when and how
that led to the creation of these loves.
And so, in your desires, three ﬂames are spent.
49* Counting, you would not get to twice times ten
as quickly as the angels, in some part,
clouded those elements on which you feed.
52 The rest remained, and then began their art
with such great pleasure that, as you can tell,
they never choose to leave their circlings.
55 The ﬁrst cause of the fall was that cursed ﬂounce
of arrogance, in one whom you have seen
gripped tight below the weight of all the world.
58 The angels you see here restrainedly
acknowledged of themselves the utmost good
who made them quick to understand all this.
61 Their intellectual sight was, therefore, raised
through merit and illuminating grace
so high that they, in will, are full and ﬁrm.

64* And here I would not have you be in doubt.
It is a merit to receive God’s grace,
in measure as hearts open up to that.
67 By now, there’s much in this great council hall
that, if my words are safely gathered in,
you may well contemplate without more aid.
70 But since, down there, your universities
argue that angels are of such a kind
as understand, have memories and free will,
73* I’ll still continue till you see pure truth –
which, in ambiguous lectures there on earth,
is doubtful and so easily confused.
76 These beings, full of happiness to see
the face of God from which there’s none who hide,
at no point turned their eyes away from that.
79 And so their line of vision is not cut
by new-formed objects, and they, therefore, need
no memory (thought dividing these from thought).
82 And so, down there, not sleeping, still they dream,
thinking they speak the truth – or thinking not.
The latter brings more guilt and greater shame.
85* Philosophizing, you, down there, do not
proceed by any one true path. You’re swept
along by show and love of showy thoughts.
88 Yet even this is tolerated here
with less contempt than when God’s Holy Writ
is put aside or twisted out of true.
91 No thought is given to what blood it cost
to sow that seed on earth, nor what delight
is given when we humbly stick to that.
94 All bend their wits to mere display, and strive
for bright ideas. Then preachers ﬂick-read these,
and, as to what the Gospels say, are mute.
97 One argues that, when Christ died on the Cross,
the moon turned back to form an obstacle,
so sunlight could not show itself down here.

100 All lies! The light hid by its own free choice.
And that is why the same eclipse replied
to Indians and to Spaniards as to Jews.
103 There aren’t, in Florence, half so many wops
as all around in pulpits every year,
such poppycockeries get blurted out.
106 And so the sheep, who don’t know anything ,
come from the pasture pastured full of wind.
It’s no excuse that they don’t see the harm.
109* Christ did not say, to his ﬁrst holy band,
“Go out and preach pure prattle to the world.”
He gave them true foundations that would stand.
112 And these resounded in their cheeks so well
that, ﬁghting to ignite the ﬁre of faith,
they used the Gospel as both shield and lance.
115 Now preachers go with feeble jokes and gags
and, just so long as they can raise a laugh,
their hoods puﬀ up. They ask for nothing more.
118 A devil bird, though, nestles in their cowls.
Were folk to see this, they would see (they must!)
what sort of pardons these are they so trust.
121 And so such idiocy grows on earth
that all, without good evidence or proof,
chase after every promise they hear made.
124* Pigs of Saint Anthony grow plump on these –
and many others, too, still bigger pigs –
paying with currency that bears no stamp.
127 But we’ve digressed enough. So turn your eyes
once more towards the road that lies ahead,
so that we cut our path to suit our hours.
130* In number, the angelic natures climb
so far beyond us that no mortal tongue
nor human thought could ever reach to that.
133 And if you note what Daniel has revealed,
you’ll see, while speaking of the “thousands” there, the
ﬁnal number is concealed from view.

136 The primal light, whose rays shine out on all,
is taken up in ways as numerous
as there are splendours that it couples with.
139 Therefore, since depth of feeling follows act,
in each of these the sweetness of their love
seethes diﬀerently – and diﬀerent, too, in warmth.
142 See now the height and all the generous breadth
of God’s eternal worth. These mirrors all
were made by Him, where He Himself now breaks,
145 one in Himself remaining as before.’

CANTO 30

1* Maybe, around six thousand miles away,
the sixth hour, close to noon, ﬂares out, while earth
inclines its shadow-cone to rest, near level.
4 At this same time, the mid-point of the sky
will start, so deep above us, to transform,
and some stars lose their semblance in those depths.
7 Then brightest Aurora who serves the sun
advances and, dawning, the skies, vista
by vista, are closed till even the loveliest is gone.
10 In this way, too, the victories that play
for ever round the point that conquered me –
enclosed, it seems, by that which they enclose – 13 was,
little by little, quenched before my gaze.
And so, from seeing nothing – and in love –
I turned my eyes towards Beatrice.
16 If all that has, till this, been said of her
were now enclosed to form one word of praise,
it would not, even so, fulﬁl my need.
19 The beauty I saw, transcending every kind,
is far beyond us here – nor only us.
Its maker, I think, alone could know its joy.
22 From now on, I’ll admit, I’m overwhelmed,
defeated worse than all before – in comic
or in tragic genre – by what my theme demands.
25 As sunlight trembles in enfeebled eyes,
calling to mind how sweet to me her smile was,
itself deprives my mind of memory.

28 Not since the day that I, in our ﬁrst life,
ﬁrst saw her face until this living sight,
has song in me been cut so cleanly short.
31 It is, however, right that I stand down –
as every artist, at the utmost, does –
and no more trace her beauty, forming verse.
34 And so what then she was I now will leave
to clarions far greater than my trumpet sounds, and draw
my vaunting line towards its end.
37 As she then was – a guide in word and deed,
her work all done – she spoke again: ‘We’ve left the
greatest of material spheres, rising
40 to light, pure light of intellect, all love,
the love of good in truth, all happiness,
a happiness transcending every rapture.
43 Here you will see the two great heavenly ranks,
angels and saints – the saints in countenance
as you, on Judgement Day, will see them stand.’
46* As lights, when ﬂashing suddenly, disperse
the spirits of the retina, and rob
the eye of seeing even strong, bright things,
49 so, bright around me, shone a living light
that left me, baby-like, in swaddling weaves
of brilliance, so that nothing showed to me.
52 ‘The love that gives this Heaven its quietness
will always make its saving welcome thus,
to form a candle ready for its ﬂame.’
55 No sooner had these brief words entered me
than I rose up – as truly I could tell –
above the summit of my natural powers.
58 New seeing-strength I kindled in myself,
so that no light, however crystalline,
could cause my eyes to close in self-defence.
61 I saw light form a river in full spate,
ﬁre-dazzle-gilded, ﬂowing through verges
painted afresh in colours of wonderful spring.

64 And rising from that ﬂood, alive, were sparks
that everywhere alighted on the ﬂowers,
like rubies set in gold encirclements –
67 then all, as though the perfumes made them drunk,
plunged in that swirling miracle once more.
And yet where one sank in, still more spun out.
70 ‘The ﬁne desire that ﬁres and urges you
to gain still fuller news of all you see,
delights me more, the more the longing swells.
73 And yet before your thirst is satisﬁed,
you’ll need to drink these waters to the full.’
Those words were hers, the sunlight of my eyes.
76 Then following: ‘The river and the glint
of topaz, in and out, the smile of grass – these all are
shadowed prefaces that hint at their own truth.
79 That does not mean that any is, itself,
unripe, acid or green. The lack is yours.
Your sight as yet cannot move proudly on.’
82 No baby, waking later from its nap
than normally it would, so hurled itself
face down to mother’s milk as I did now.
85 To make my eyes, as mirrors, better still,
I bent towards the wave that, ﬂowing there,
will sweep us always onward to in-bettering.
88 I drank to the arching eaves of my brow,
and then saw all anew, as though that length
of light had now, in form, become a round.
91 If masqueraders, hidden in their veils,
undress those features (not their own) in which they’d
vanished once, their look seems somehow changed.
94* So now, it seemed, these ﬂowers and ﬂecks of light
altered, to join and celebrate still more.
And I saw, now made known, both heavenly courts.
97 Splendour of God! Through you I came to see
triumph exalting in the realm of truth.
Grant me true strength to say what then I saw.

100 There is, above us there, a light that makes
the All-Creator in creation seen
by those who only seeing Him have peace.
103 This light became a circle in its form,
extending its circumference so far
as might a belt too generous round the sun.
106 All that appears is made there by a ray
reﬂected from the curve of that First Sphere
which draws its life and movings from that light.
109 It is as though the incline of some hill
were mirrored in a lake below, as if
to view itself adorned in ﬂower and richest green.
112 Above that light, and standing round, I saw
a thousand tiers or more as mirrorings
of those of ours who’ve now returned up there.
115 Imagine, when the least of all these grades
could gather to itself so great a light,
how great the wealth is at the rose’s fringe.
118 My eyes, despite such breadth and altitude,
were not confused or blurred but took all in –
the kind and sum of this light-heartedness.
121 Nothing’s gained here or lost by ‘near’ and ‘far’.
For where God rules without some means between, the
law of nature bears no weight at all.
124 Into the gold of that now-always rose,
which grows from arc to arc, dilates and breathes the
scent of praise to always-springtime Sun,
127 she drew me – Beatrice – like someone
yearning, while silent, to say: ‘The wonder!
Look there, how great this white-caped gathering is!
130 Our city, look! And see how wide it sweeps.
The honoured places – look! – they’re almost full, and few
we long to see are still to come.
133* Your eyes are ﬁxed upon a single throne,
drawn by the crown already set on that.
And long before you join this marriage feast,

136 the soul will sit – imperial in the world –
of noble Arrigo, who came to rule
an Italy unready for him yet.
139 The blind cupidity bewitching you
has made you all akin to little brats
who – famished, dying – still beat oﬀ their nurse.
142* And in the Sacred Forum one presides
whose public and whose covert deeds will not
accord or travel in a single groove.
145 But not for long. God will not suﬀer him
to keep that sacred role. He’ll soon be ﬂung
where Simon Magus gets what he deserves.
148 The Anagnese pope will sink still further down.’

CANTO 31

1 In form, then, as a rose, pure, brilliant, white,
there stood before me now the sacred ranks
that Christ, by His own blood, has made His bride.
4 The other force that, ﬂying, sees and sings
the glory that so stirs their love of Him –
the goodness, too, that makes them all they are – 7 came
down, as might a swarm of bees that ﬁrst
en-ﬂower themselves, returning, afterwards,
to where their eﬀorts are made sweet to taste.
10 They search the utmost depths of that great ﬂower,
with all its many petals. Then they rise
once more to where their love will always dwell.
13 Their faces all were bright with living ﬂame,
their wings of gold, their other parts so white
that snow has never reached to that extreme.
16 Descending in the ﬂower from tier to tier,
they oﬀered peace and all the burning love
that they won there (wings fanning down their ﬂanks).
19 Nor, interposed between the ﬂower and height,
did all that multitude in ﬂight impede
that radiance or the faculties of sight.
22 Divine light pierces through the universe –
to be received, as ﬁt, in all degrees –
in such a way that nothing can oppose.
25 That realm – its gaudeamus free of strife –
where chosen, past and new, such crowds resort,
aims all its love and seeing at one sign.

28 O three-fold light that, in one single star,
so ﬂashing in their sight brings them content!
Look down upon our world of squalls and storms.
31* If savages from northern shores (where skies
are dark, day in, day out, under the Helicean sign that
gazes, wheeling, on her well-loved son)
34 at seeing Rome and her aspiring works
are stupeﬁed to view the Lateran,
soaring so high above all mortal things,
37 then what of me – from human to divine,
coming to this eternal realm from time,
from Florence to a nation sane and true –
40 what pure astonishment must I have felt?
Indeed, between that shock and solemn joy,
I, gladly, did not hear or speak a thing.
43 As pilgrims gaze, enthralled at their new life,
around the temple that they’d vowed to reach,
hoping to tell, already, where they’ve been,
46 so, pacing upwards through the living light,
I drew my eyes through every step and grade
now up, now lower, circling all around.
49 I saw there faces swayed to caritas ,
arrayed in their own smiles and light not theirs, and all
they did adorned with dignity.
52 The general form of Heaven had by now
been grasped entirely as my glance swept round,
ﬁxing, though, ﬁrmly no particular.
55 And so I turned – my will once more on ﬁre –
to ask that she, my lady, should respond.
(For here and there, some doubt in me remained.)
58* I’d looked for one thing. Something else replied.
I’d see Beatrice, as I believed,
and saw an elder, robed like all in glory.
61 Around his countenance and eyes there ﬂowed
the generosity of joy, his look
a gentle father’s, ﬁrm and virtuous.

64 And I at once: ‘Where is she?’ And at this:
‘So I can bring an end to your desire,
Beatrice moved me from the place I keep.
67 If, to the highest round of that third step,
you’ll raise your eyes, you’ll see her on the throne to
which her merits have allotted her.’
70 Without reply, I raised my eyes up there
and saw her, mirroring eternal rays,
to form a crown or aureole around.
73 From that high region where the thunder rolls,
no mortal eye could ever be so far –
though sunk beneath the ocean’s utmost depth –
76 as my sight was from Beatrice now.
Yet that meant nothing. For her image came
not blurred or lessened by the space between.
79 ‘In you, beloved, my hope grows strong. All this
you bore: to greet me and to make me whole,
you left your footprint in the depth of Hell.
82 The inward strength and grace of everything
I since have seen has come to me, I know,
through you, your goodness and your grace and power.
85 From servitude you’ve led me to be free
by all those pathways and by all the means
you have within your power to exercise.
88 Keep safe in me your own magniﬁcence,
so that my soul, since you have made it well,
should leave the knot of body, pleasing you.’
91 My prayer was thus. And she, as far away
as she might seem, smiled and looked down at me,
then turned again towards the eternal spring.
94 The holy patriarch: ‘So you may perfectly
attain the summit of the path you take
(for that I’m sent, by prayer and holy love),
97 ﬂy through this garden with your wings of sight,
for seeing this will make your gaze more ﬁt
to climb towards the radiance of God.

100 The Heavenly Queen – I burn in all my soul
for love of her – will bring us every grace.
I am Bernardo, her most faithful one.’
103* Like someone coming from Croatia, say,
to view our Veil – the Saint Veronica –
who still can’t satisfy the age-old ache
106 and, while the image is displayed to him,
will murmur in his thoughts: ‘My Lord, Christ Jesus, was
this the way, true God, you looked on earth?’
109 so I – with wondering eyes on that bright life
of caritas who, contemplating, caught
some taste, within our world, of ﬁnal peace.
112 ‘Child born of grace’ (so he began) ‘if you
continue with your eyes still ﬁxed below,
you’ll hear no note of this bright, joyful state.
115 Look through these circles to the furthest oﬀ
so far that you shall see, enthroned, the queen
to whom this realm is subject in its vows.’
118 I raised my eyes. And, as when morning dawns,
the orient horizon in new light
defeats the part in which the sun goes down,
121 so too, as though my eyes were travelling
from valley up to mountain peak, I saw
the rim outdo, in brightness, every other part.
124* As sky ﬂares ﬁercest where the chariot pole –
mis-turned by Phaeton once – is waited for,
the light diminishing on either side,
127* so did that oriﬂamme (peace-pennant now)
grow bright within its central spur, as ﬂame,
elsewhere, in equal measure, slacked and dimmed.
130 And, in the central band, their wings outspread,
I saw, in thousands, angels – feasting, dancing – in blaze
and chosen deed all diﬀering.
133* I saw there, smiling on their games and songs,
the height of Beauty who, as height of Joy,
was there in all the eyes of all the saints.

136 And even if, in words, I had such wealth
as, in imagining, I did, I’d still not dare
attempt to say the least of that delight.
139 Bernardo, seeing where my eyes were set,
ﬁxed, won, attentive to her warm regard,
now turned his own so feelingly to her
142 that mine in wonder blazed out all the more.

CANTO 32

1* Heart-whole in pleasure, the contemplative
freely took on himself the teacher’s role,
beginning thus the holy words he spoke:
4* ‘The gash that Mary healed and soothed with oil
was opened ﬁrst, and then made worse, by her
who sits, so beautiful, at Mary’s feet.
7* Ranked in the order that the third thrones form,
lower than Eve, there Rachel sits. Along
from her there is, as you see, Beatrice.
10 Sara, Rebecca, Judith and the one
who bore the mother of the man who sang,
mourning his fault, the “Miserere mei” .
13 Descending step to step, you see all these
as I, in giving each her name, proceed,
now travelling down this rose from leaf to leaf.
16 And downward from the seventh of these tiers
(as down to that) the Hebrew women come,
dividing all the curls within that ﬂower.
19* And these (according to the way their faith
in Christ looked back or forth) here form the wall
that separates the sacred steps in two.
22 On that side, where the ﬂower is fully grown,
with all its petals at their full extent,
sit those who showed belief in Christ to come.
25* There on the other side, where unﬁlled space
still intersects the hemispheres, are those
who turned their countenance to Christ now come.

28 And where, on this side, there’s the glorious throne
of Heaven’s own Lady and, below, those seats
that, under hers, divide the rose in two,
31* so, too, across from that, there sits great John.
That saint bore desert and cruel martyrdom,
then, after – till Christ came – two years in Hell
34* And under him, elected to divide,
Saint Francis, Benedict, Augustine, too,
with others down to here, from rank to rank.
37 Look up in wonder at God’s providence.
He’ll ﬁll this garden to the same extent
with those who kept the faith in these two ways.
40 Know, too, that from the rung that, midway, strikes
the line that marks these two divisions oﬀ,
no one will sit by merit of their own –
43* of others, rather, where conditions hold.
For all of these are spirits loosed from earth
before they, truly, could conceive free choice.
46 And this, if you will look and listen hard,
will be entirely clear to you. Just note
their faces. Hear, as well, their children-voice.
49 Now you’re in doubt and, doubting, do not speak.
But I shall disentangle this tight knot,
which your own subtle reasonings have tied.
52* Within the broad expanse of all this realm
there cannot be a single point that’s chance,
nor any hunger, thirst or misery.
55 For all that you may see is here decreed
by God’s eternal law. Hence, right and ﬁt,
all corresponds as ﬁnger to a ring.
58 And so it is that, not without good cause,
these children – sped too soon to this true life –
are in their excellences less and more.
61 The king, through whom this kingdom is at peace,
in such great love, and in such pure delight,
that nothing in our wills dare aim so high,

64 creating, in his look of happiness,
all minds, bestowed, as he best pleased, his grace
in diﬀerent ways. The outcome says enough.
67* And this, expressed and clear in Holy Writ,
is noted in the case of those two twins
who, in their mother’s womb, were moved to wrath.
70 It follows from the colour of their hair
to what degree of grace the highest light
encrowns most ﬁttingly the head of each.
73 Therefore, with no regard to how they act,
these are placed here in diﬀering degrees
by diﬀerence only of their ﬁrst sharp sight.
76 In earliest times, it used to be enough,
to gain salvation, that with innocence
parental faith alone should be conjoined.
79* Then, when these early epochs were complete,
all males were circumcised to win them powers
appropriate to their wings of innocence.
82 But, later, when the age of grace arrived,
such innocence – when baptism in Christ
was not fulﬁlled – was bound on Hell’s ﬁrst rim.
85 Return now. See that face resembling Christ
closer than all. For that bright light alone
can make you wholly ﬁt to look on Christ.’
88 I saw such happiness rain down on her,
borne by those holy intellects – made ﬁrst
to ﬂy with wings across that heavenly height –
91 that nothing I had ever seen before
had brought my wondering eyes to such a poise,
nor shown so much to me of how God looks.
94* And that ﬁrst angel-love, descending there,
was singing – wings extended in her sight –
‘Ave Maria gratia plena’ .
97 There answered this the sacred cantilene
from every region of the happy court.
At which, their faces showed the more serene.

100 ‘O holy father, who for me could bear
to be down here and leave that lovely place
where, as eternally decreed, you sit,
103 which is that angel who, with such delight,
looks at our Queen and gazes in her eyes
so deep in love he seems to be on ﬁre?’
106 I went, in this way, back to learn from him
of one who drew his beauty from Maria,
as, from the sun, the morning star draws light.
109 ‘All prowess, charm and elegance of heart
as may appear in angels or men’s souls
is found in him, and we all wish it so.
112 For he it is who carried down the palm
to Mary when the only Son of God
chose to take on the weight of human form.
115 But come now, note and follow with your eyes,
as I go speaking, all the noble sires
of this supremely true imperium.
118 These two who sit above – the happiest,
in being nearest to the Empress throne –
are as the double root-stock of this rose.
121 He who sits next in justice, to her left,
is that ﬁrst father through whose reckless taste
the human species tasted so much gall.
124 There on the right you see the honoured sire
of Holy Church to whom Christ left in trust
the keys to this most delicate of ﬂowers.
127* And he who saw, before he came to die,
the heavy times of that beloved bride,
ﬁrst won upon the Cross with lance and nails,
130 sits next to him, and next to him now rests
that lord beneath whose guidance there once lived
a race ungrateful, shifting, obstinate.
133* Across from Peter, as you see, sits Anne,
so happy as she wonders at her child
she does not move her eyes to sing “Hosanna”.

136 And facing Adam, father of our tribe,
Lucia sits. When you, in ruin, bent your brows,
Lucia moved that donna to your aid.
139 But since your time of slumber races by,
at this point we shall end, as tailors do –
who skilfully make skirts from little cloth.
142 And turn your eyes towards the Primal Love,
so that, in looking there, your eye should pierce
as far as possible His dazzling light.
145 But lest it be, perhaps, on your frail wings,
thinking you rise beyond, you sink back down,
it’s best that, praying for the gift of grace,
148 you beg for grace from her who can assist.
And here you’ll follow me with such good heart
that from my words your feelings won’t depart.’
151 And so he now began his holy prayer.

CANTO 33

1 ‘Virgin and mother, daughter of your son,
greater than all in honour and humility,
you are the point that truth eternally
4 is ﬁxed upon. And you have made the nature
of the human being proud. Its maker, then,
did not disdain to make himself his making.
7 Love, in your womb, was fanned to ﬁre again.
And here, in this eternal peace, the warmth of love has
brought the Rose to germinate and bloom.
10 You are, for us, the noon-time torch of love.
You are, among those mortals there below,
the clearest fountain of their living hopes.
13* You are, in dignity and power, Our Lady.
All who, in wanting grace, do not seek help
from you, might wish to soar yet lack the wings.
16 Nor in your kindness do you give your aid
to those alone who ask, but often run,
before they ask, to them in generous freedom.
19 In you is pity, in you compassion,
in you all-giving power. All good in you
is gathered up that creature-form can bear.
22 This man is one who, from the deepest void
in all the universe, has seen thus far,
and one by one, all lives in spirit-mode.
25 To you, a suppliant, he comes, and asks
that, by your grace, he gains the strength to rise in sight
more, still to greet the ﬁnal peace.

28 I never burned for visions of my own
more than I do that he might see. To you
I oﬀer all my prayers – praying my prayers
31 are not too few – that you should free this man
from all the clouds of his mortality,
so highest happiness be shown to him.
34 Our Queen, to you, who may do what you will,
I also pray you keep him (he has seen
so much!) healthy in all his heart intends.
37 Watch, and defeat the impulses of man.
See! Beatrice with so many saints
closes her hands in prayers along with mine.’
40 The eyes – which God both loves and venerates –
attentive to these orisons, made clear
how welcome to her were these holy prayers
43 and then turned straight to the eternal light
in which (we’re bound to think) no creature’s eye inwardly
travels with such clarity.
46 And drawing nearer, as I had to now,
the end of all desires, in my own self
I ended all the ardour of desire.
49 Now Bernard, smiling, made a sign to me
that I look up. Already, though, I was,
by my own will, as he desired I be.
52 My sight, becoming pure and wholly free,
entered still more, then more, along the ray
of that one light which, of itself, is true.
55 Seeing, henceforward, was far more than speech –
yielding before the sight I saw – can show.
Mind’s memory yields, outraged at that beyond.
58 Like those who see so clearly while they dream
that marks of feeling, when their dreaming ends, remain,
though nothing more returns to mind,
61 so I am now. For nearly all I saw
has gone, even if, still, within my heart,
there drops the sweetness that was born from that.

64* So, too, in sunlight, snow will lose its seal.
So, too, the oracles the Sibyl wrote
on weightless leaves are lost upon the wind.
67 You raise yourself so far, O highest light,
above our dying thoughts! Now lend once more
some little part of what it seemed you were,
70 and make my tongue suﬃcient in its powers
that it may leave at least one telling spark
of all your glory to a future race.
73 Returning somewhat to my memory,
re-echoing a little in my verse,
your triumph over all will be more known.
76 As I believe, the sharp light I sustained
in that live ray was such that, if I’d turned
away, eyes blurring, I’d have lost my track.
79 And therefore (I remember this) I grew
the braver as I bore that light, and joined
the look I had to that unending might.
82 Grace, in all plenitude, you dared me set
my seeing eyes on that eternal light
so that all seeing there achieved its end.
85 Within in its depths, this light, I saw, contained,
bound up and gathered in a single book,
the leaves that scatter through the universe –
88 beings and accidents and modes of life,
as though blown all together in a way
that what I say is just a simple light.
91 This knotting-up of universal form
I saw, I’m sure of that. For now I feel,
in saying this, a gift of greater joy.
94* One single point in trauma is far more,
for me, than those millennia since sail
made Neptune marvel under Argos-shade.
97 And so my mind, held high above itself,
looked on, intent and still, in wondering awe
and, lit by wonder, always ﬂared anew.

100 We all become, as that light strikes us, such
we cannot (this would be impossible)
consent to turn and seek some other face.
103 For good – the only object of our will –
is gathered up entire in that one light.
Outside it, all is ﬂawed that’s perfect there.
106 And now my spark of words will come more short –
even of what I still can call to mind –
than baby tongues still bathing in mum’s milk.
109 But not because that living light on which,
in wonder, I now ﬁxed my eyes showed more
than always as before and one sole sight.
112 Rather, as sight in me, yet looking on,
grew ﬁner still, one single showing-forth
(me, changing mutely) laboured me more near.
115* Within the being – lucid, bright and deep –
of that high brilliance, there appeared to me
three circling spheres, three-coloured, one in span.
118 And one, it seemed, was mirrored by the next
twin rainbows, arc to arc. The third seemed ﬁre, and
breathed to ﬁrst and second equally.
121 How short mere speaking falls, how faint against
my own idea. And this idea, compared
to what I saw…well, ‘little’ hardly squares.
124 Eternal light, you sojourn in yourself alone.
Alone, you know yourself. Known to yourself,
you, knowing, love and smile on your own being.
127 An inter-circulation, thus conceived,
appears in you like mirrored brilliancy.
But when a while my eyes had looked this round,
130 deep in itself, it seemed – as painted now,
in those same hues – to show our human form.
At which, my sight was set entirely there.
133* As some geometer may ﬁx his mind
to ﬁnd a circle-area, yet lack,
in thought, the principle his thoughts require,

136 likewise with me at this sight seen so new.
I willed myself to see what ﬁt there was,
image to circle, how this all in-where’d.
139 But mine were wings that could not rise to that,
save that, with this, my mind, was stricken through by
sudden lightning bringing what it wished.
142 All powers of high imagining here failed.
But now my will and my desire were turned,
as wheels that move in equilibrium,

