CANTO"

|

Nel mezzo del cammin di nostra vita
mi ritrovai per una selva oscura,
ché la diritta via era smarrita.
Ahi quanto a dir qual era é cosa dura
esta selva selvaggia e aspra e forte
che nel pensier rinova la paura!
Tant’ é amara che poco é piu morte;
ma per trattar del ben ch’i’ vi trovai,
diro de l’altre cose ch’1’ v’ho scorte.
10

13

16

19

22

25

28

Io non so ben ridir com’ i’ v’intrai,

tant’ era pien di sonno a quel punto
che la verace via abbandonai.
Ma poi ch’i’ fui al pié d’un colle giunto,
la dove terminava quella valle
che m’avea di paura il cor compunto,
guardai in alto, e vidi le sue spalle
vestite gia de’ raggi del pianeta
che mena dritto altrui per ogne calle.
Allor fu la paura un poco queta
che nel lago del cor m’era durata
la notte ch’i’ passai con tanta pieta.
E come quei che con lena affannata,
uscito fuor del pelago a la riva,
si volge a l’acqua perigliosa e guata:
cosi l’animo mio, ch’ancor fuggiva,
si volse a retro a rimirar lo passo
che non lascio gia mai persona viva.
Poi ch’éi posato un poco il corpo lasso,
ripresi via per la piaggia diserta
si che ’] pié fermo sempre era ’] piu basso.

26

CANTO

1

The dark wood—the three beasts—Virgil—the prophecy of the
greyhound—the plan of the journey

10

In the middle of the journey of our life, I came to
myself in a dark wood, for the straight way was lost.
Ah, how hard a thing it is to say what that wood
was, so savage and harsh and strong that the
thought of it renews my fear!
It is so bitter that death is little more so! But to
treat of the good that I found there, I will tell of
the other things I saw.
I cannot really say how I entered there, so full of
sleep was I at the point when I abandoned the true
way.
But when I had reached the foot of a hill, where

22

the valley ended that had pierced my heart with fear,
I looked on high and saw its shoulders clothed
already with the rays of the planet that leads us
straight on every path.
Then was the fear a little quieted that in the lake
of my heart had lasted through the night I passed
with so much anguish.
And like one with laboring breath, come forth out
of the deep onto the shore, who turns back to the

25

28

perilous water and stares:
so my spirit, still fleeing, turned back to gaze
again at the pass that has never yet left anyone alive.
After I had a little rested my weary body, I took
my way again along that deserted slope, so that my
halted foot was always the lower.

Zi,

Inferno .

31

34

By

40

43

46

Ed ecco, quasi al cominciar de |’erta,

una lonza leggera e presta molto,
che di pel macolato era coverta;
e non mi si partia dinanzi al volto,
anzi ’mpediva tanto il mio cammino
ch’i’ fui per ritornar pit volte volto.
Temp’ era del principio del mattino,
e "1 sol montava ’n su con quelle stelle
ch’ eran con lui quando |’amor divino
mosse di prima quelle cose belle;
si ch’ a bene sperar m’era cagione
di quella fiera a la gaetta pelle
ora del tempo e la dolce stagione.
Ma non si che paura non mi desse
la vista che m’apparve d’un leone.
Questi parea che contra me venisse
con la test’ alta e con rabbiosa fame,

49

BY

55

58

si che parea che l’aere ne tremesse.
Ed una lupa, che di tutte brame
sembiava carca ne la sua magrezza,
e molte genti fe gia viver grame,
questa mi porse tanto di gravezza
con la paura ch’ uscia di sua vista,
ch’ io perdei la speranza de l’altezza.
E qual é quei che volontieri acquista,
e giugne ’] tempo che perder lo face,
che ’n tutti suoi pensier piange e s’attrista:
tal mi fece la bestia sanza pace,
che, venendomi ’ncontro, a poco a poco
mi ripigneva la dove ’ sol tace.

61

Mentre ch’i’ rovinava in basso loco,

64

dinanzi a li occhi mi si fu offerto
chi per lungo silenzio parea fioco.
Quando vidi costui nel gran diserto,
“Miserere di me,” gridai a lui,
“qual che tu sii, od ombra od omo certo!”

67

Rispuosemi: “Non omo, omo gia fui,

e li parenti miei furon lombardi,
mantoani per patria ambedui.
28

Canto 1

31

And behold, almost at the beginning of the steep,
a leopard, light and very swift, covered with spotted
fur;

34

oF

40

43

46

49

DZ

533)

and it did not depart from before my face but
rather so impeded my way that I was at several
turns turned to go back.
The time was the beginning of the morning, and
the sun was mounting up with those stars that were
with it when God’s love
first set those lovely things in motion; so that I
took reason to have good hope of that beast with its
gaily painted hide
from the hour of the morning and the sweet
season; but not so that I did not fear the sight of a
lion that appeared to me.
He appeared to be coming against me with his
head high and with raging hunger, so that the air
appeared to tremble at him.
And a she-wolf, that seemed laden with all

cravings in her leanness and has caused many
peoples to live in wretchedness,
she put on me so much heaviness with the fear
that came from the sight of her, that I lost hope of
reaching the heights.
And like one who gladly acquires, and the time
arrives that makes him lose, who in all of his

thoughts weeps and becomes sad:
58

61

64

so she made me, that restless beast, who, coming

against me, little by little was driving me back to
where the sun is silent.
While I was falling down into a low place, before
my eyes one had offered himself to me who through
long silence seemed hoarse.
When I saw him in the great wilderness, “ Miserere
—on

me,” I cried to him, “whatever you may be,

whether shade or true man!”
67

He replied: “Not a man, I was formerly a man,

and my parents were Lombards, Mantuans both by
birth.
29

Inferno |
70

Ue

76

7

82

85

88

91

94

97

Nacqui sub Julio, ancor che fosse tardi,
e vissi a Roma sotto ’] buono Augusto

nel tempo de li déi falsi e bugiardi.
Poeta fui, e cantai di quel giusto
figliuol d’Anchise che venne di Troia
poi che ’] superbo Ilion fu combusto.
Ma tu perché ritorni a tanta noia?
Perché non sali il dilettoso monte
ch’ é principio e cagion di tutta gioia?”
“Or se’ tu quel Virgilio e quella fonte
che spandi di parlar si largo fiume?”
rispuos’ io lui con vergognosa fronte.
“O de li altri poeti onore e lume,
vagliami ’] lungo studio e ’] grande amore
che m’ha fatto cercar lo tuo volume.
Tu se’ lo mio maestro e ’] mio autore,

tu se’ solo colui da cw’ io tolsi
lo bello stilo che m’ha fatto onore.
Vedi la bestia per cu’ io mi volsi:
aiutami da lei, famoso saggio,
ch’ ella mi fa tremar le vene e 1 polsi.”
“A te convien tenere altro viaggio,”
rispuose, poi che lagrimar mi vide,
“se vuo’ campar d’esto loco selvaggio;
ché questa bestia, per la qual tu gride,
non lascia altrui passar per la sua via,
ma tanto lo ’mpedisce che l’uccide;
e ha natura si malvagia e ria,

che mai non empie la bramosa voglia,
e dopo ’] pasto ha piu fame che pria.
100

103

106

Molti son li animali a cui s’ammoglia,

e€ piu saranno ancora, infin che ’] veltro
verra, che la fara morir con doglia.
Questi non cibera terra né peltro,
ma sapienza, amore e virtute,
e sua nazion sara tra feltro e feltro.
Di quella umile Italia fia salute
per cui mori la vergine Cammilla,
Eurialo e Turno e Niso di ferute.
30

Canto 1

70

73

76

72

82

85

88

91

94

I was born sub Iulio, though it was late, and I

lived in Rome under the good Augustus in the time
of the false and lying gods.
I was a poet, and I sang of that just son of
Anchises who came from Troy, when proud Ilion
was destroyed by fire.
But you, why do you return to so much suffering?
why do you not climb the delightful mountain that is
origin and cause of all joy?”
“Now are you that Virgil, that fountain which
spreads forth so broad a river of speech?” I replied
with shamefast brow.
“O honor and light of the other poets, let my long
study and great love avail me, that has caused me to
search through your volume.
You are my master and my author, you alone are
he from whom I have taken the pleasing style that
has won me honor.
See the beast for which I have turned back: help
me against her, famous sage, for she makes my veins
and pulses tremble.”
“You must hold to another path,” he replied, after

he saw me weep, “if you wish to escape from this
savage place;
for this beast at which you cry out lets no one
pass by her way, but so much impedes him that she
kills him;

Oi

100

103

and she has a nature so evil and cruel that her
greedy desire is never satisfied, and after feeding she
is hungrier than before.
Many are the animals with whom she mates, and
there will be more still, until the greyhound shall
come, who will make her die in pain.

He will feed on neither earth nor pelf, but on
wisdom, love, and power, and his birth will be

106

between felt and felt.
He will be the salvation of that humble Italy for
which the virgin Camilla died of her wounds, and
Euryalus, Turnus, and Nisus.
31

Inferno
109

Questi la caccera per ogne villa,
fin che l’avra rimessa ne lo ’nferno,

112

115

118

2

124

127

130

133

la onde ’nvidia prima dipartilla.
Ond’ io per lo tuo me’ penso e discerno
che tu mi segul, e io saro tua guida,
e trarrotti di qui per loco etterno,
ove udirai le disperate strida,
vedrai li antichi spiriti dolenti,
ch’a la seconda morte ciascun grida;
e vederai color che son contenti
nel foco, perché speran di venire,
quando che sia, a le beati genti.
A le quai poi se tu vorrai salire,
anima fia a cid piu di me degna:
con lei ti lascero nel mio partire;
ché quello Imperador che la su regna,
perch’ i’ fu’ ribellante a la sua legge,
non vuol che ’n sua citta per me si vegna.
In tutte parti impera e quivi regge;
quivi é la sua citta e l’alto seggio:
oh felice colui cu’ ivi elegge!”
E io a lui: “Poeta, io ti richeggio
per quello Dio che tu non conoscesti,
accio ch’io fugga questo male e peggio,
che tu mi meni la dov’ or dicesti,

si ch’io veggia la porta di san Pietro
e color cui tu fai cotanto mesti.”
136

Allor si mosse, e io li tenni dietro.

IZ,

Canto 1

109

112

115

He will drive her from every town until he has
put her back in Hell, whence envy first sent her
forth.
Thus for your good I think and judge that you
shall follow me, and I shall be your guide, and I will
lead you from here through an eternal place,
where you will hear the desperate shrieks, you
will see the ancient suffering spirits, who all cry out
at the second death;

118

and you will see those who are content in the fire,
because they hope to come, whenever it may be, to
the blessed people.

121

To whom then if you shall wish to rise, there will

124

be a soul more worthy of that than I; with her I shall
leave you when I depart;
for that Emperor who reigns on high, because I
was a rebel to his law, wills not that I come into his

127

130

city.
In every place he commands, and there he rules;
there is his city and high throne: O happy the one he
chooses to be there!”
And I to him: “Poet, I beg you by that God whom
you did not know, so that I may flee this evil and

worse,
133

136

that you lead me where you have just now said,
so that I may see the gate of Saint Peter and those
whom you call so woebegone.”
Then he moved, and I followed after him.

NS

NOTES
1. In the middle of the journey of our life: Later passages (e.g., 21.11214) place the action of the poem in April 1300; if, as is probable, Dante was
born in May 1265, he would be thirty-five in 1300, midway in the normative

biblical lifespan, “threescore years and ten” (Psalm 90.10), mentioned by Dante
in Convivio 4.23 (cf. Is. 38.10: “In the midst of my days I shall go to the gates of
Hell”). The line suggests, with the plural possessive “our,” that the pilgrim is a
representative human being, an Everyman. Dante omits or postpones the traditional “topics of exordium,” such as announcement of subject, dedication, and

invocation of the muse; the abruptness of this beginning is highly unconventional in medieval as well as classical narrative.
2. I came to myself: The traditional translation of mi ritrovai is “I found
myself.” In our view, the prefix ri-, rather than denoting repetition here, serves
to intensify the inward nature of the event: Dante is describing a moral awakening.
We believe there is also, both here and in line 11, a (very understated) reference
to the literary genre of dream-vision, in which the dream regularly begins with
an awakening (early illustrations often show a “sleeping” poet-as-author at the
beginning); this question is more fully discussed in the note on Par. 32.139 (see
the note to 2.8).

2. a dark wood: The “wood” of error and sin (cf. Convivio 4.24.12); there
may be a reference to the “ancient forest, deep dwelling of beasts” near the mouth
of Hades in Aen. 6.179. There is probably a reference to the Platonic idea of
matter (silva in the Latin translation of the Timaeus) and also to the forest of
Arthurian romance. Dante is perhaps drawing on the beginning of his teacher
Brunetto Latini’s allegorical poem the Tesoretto, in which the narrator loses his
way in a wondrous forest, where the goddess Nature appears to instruct him.

3. the straight way: The course of the just man, leading to God (see Psalm
23.3, Prov. 2.13-14, 2 Peter 2.15). If ché is taken as che, the so-called modal

conjunction (the orthography of Dante’s time did not distinguish them), the line
could mean “where the straight way was lost.”
4-7. Ah, how hard . . . death is little more [bitter]: Note the characteristic
stress on an identity between the writing of the poem and the experience it relates:

though in terms ofthe fiction the narrator has seen God, he is still subject to all
the terrors of the journey as he narrates them.
8. to treat of the good that I found there: Trattar [to treat systematically]
is a semi-technical term, like good; this is an oblique announcement of the subject

of the poem, for the “good” he found there would seem to be the undertaking
of the journey (cf. 2.126).

34

Notes to Canto 1

11. so full of sleep: The sleep of sin and moral oblivion (as in Romans 13.1114), again, we believe, with implicit reference to dream-vision (see the note to
line 2).

13. a hill: Like the sea and the dark wood, the hill, later called a mountain, is part
of a traditional symbolic landscape we intuitively understand as representing the
position of human beings between the depths and the heights (Dante may well
have in mind the famous instance in the Old French Queste del saint Graal, pp. 91—
92). For the “Lord’s holy mountain,” see Psalms 24.3, 43.3, 121.1 and Is. 2.2—5.

17-18. the planet that leads us straight: The expression emphasizes the role
of the sun as revealer of knowledge and wisdom. In Convivio 3.12, Dante dis-

cusses the sun as the chief visible analogue of God. The sun is a “planet” (wanderer) like the six others, moving against the background of the fixed stars.
20. lake of my heart: Medieval physiology thought of the heart not as a pump,
but as a reservoir of blood and pneuma (“spirit”): fear would rush them back to

the “lake,” leaving the limbs pale and weak. Compare Vita nuova 2.4 and the
canzone “Cosi nel mio parlar voglio esser aspro,” lines 45—47 (translated in
Durling and Martinez 1990, pp. 286-90).
21. anguish: Dante’s word is pieta, a form of pieta, which includes the meanings “pity,” “pitiable suffering,” even “piety.”

22. like one with laboring breath: The first formal simile: the pilgrim has metaphorically escaped shipwreck (“slope”’ at line 29 can also mean “‘shore’’), as Aeneas
does literally at the beginning of the Aeneid. Hollander (1969) explores an elaborate
system of parallels with the opening of the Aeneid in the first cantos of the Inferno.
27. the pass that has never yet left anyone alive: Probably damnation itself (see Prov. 12.28).

28. my weary body: The presence ofthe pilgrim’s body, of which this is the
first mention, will be insisted on throughout Inferno and Purgatorio.
30. my halted foot was always the lower: Freccero (1959) has given the
best explanation of this famous crux. In the act of walking, one foot must be
fixed to support the body while the other moves; according to Aristotle and
others, we naturally begin to walk by lifting the right foot, so that the left can be
referred to as the naturally fixed or halted foot. Thus the pilgrim’s left foot is
dragging behind his right one, is always “the lower.”
The soul was said to walk (i.e., to move toward its objects) on the two “feet”
of its two chief faculties, intellect and will (desire); the left foot of the soul (will,
for the heart is on the left side) drags behind the right foot (intellect) because of

the laming wound in man’s nature inflicted by Adam’s Fall: intellect is able to
see the goal clearly, but will moves toward it only haltingly.

315}

Inferno |

32. a leopard: Commentators do not agree on the significance of this and the
other beasts—lion and she-wolf—that drive back the pilgrim, which Dante’s
Italian ties together with alliteration (lonza, leone, lupa). Various possibilities have
been suggested; the most likely correlates them with the triple division of Hell
into sins of disordered appetite (she-wolf), violence (lion), and fraud (leopard);
other identifications, such as the leopard with lust and the she-wolf with fraud,

though traditional, seem arbitrary. The poem does seem to call out for labels
here, but it is important to see that at this point it is withholding definitive clues:
the pilgrim may be as mystified as the reader, and only later experience will explain
the beasts.

37-43. The time was . . . the sweet season: This second astronomical reference identifies the beginning of the action as related to the spring equinox
(March 21 by convention, March 14 in fact, in Dante’s time); medieval tradi-

tion held that at the moment of creation the sun was at the first point of Aries.
Other evidence in the poem suggests the date of April 8, 1300.
44-48. but not so. . . tremble at him: Note the repeated emphasis on Dante’s
fear. The dreamlike character of the scene raises the question to what extent the
beasts are projections of internal dangers.
49-54. And a she-wolf. . . of reaching the heights: Why the pilgrim should
be most afraid of the she-wolf is not explained (cf. line 97, with note).

55. gladly acquires: The economic simile (first of many) targets a society, the
Florence of Dante’s youth and young adulthood, only recently become wealthy
and acquisitive.
60. the sun is silent: That is, where knowledge is darkened and hope is gone.
The sun is traditionally associated with speech (e.g., Psalm 18.2-3).
62-63. before my eyes ... seemed hoarse: Virgil is now introduced, to
become Dante’s guide. The elaborately contorted phrasing, which the translation renders literally, is striking in two respects. First, the pluperfect “had been
offered” suggests that in some sense Virgil has been there for some time; second,

the passive suggests that Dante must see Virgil before Virgil can speak to him.
These features are particularly appropriate if the figure of Virgil is taken to refer
to the codex of the historical Vergil’s works (for our spellings, see below), where
his voice does exist for the eye; they are most probably to be connected with an
allegorical meaning: a reading ofVergil’s works, especially of the Aeneid, would
seem to have played a prominent role in the spiritual crisis of 1300 (cf. Leo 1951).
Thus the conventional allegoresis of Dante’s Virgil as representing “human
reason,” while at times undeniably valid, is much too narrow. The figure of Virgil

in the poem should be taken to refer to the soul of the historical Vergil, expressed
in his voice—his poetry—but in possession of added knowledge because he is

36

Notes to Canto 1

dead, though still subject to some of his old limitations. Virgil’s hoarseness has
been variously explained (the Italian allows “dim” or “weak” as well as “hoarse”):
his Latin is no longer understood; his works have been disregarded (whether by
Dante or others); or he is a shade like those of the Vergilian underworld.
Modern scholarship has established that Vergilius is the correct spelling of
Vergil’s name; Dante follows the traditional medieval spelling in writing Virgilio.
We shall maintain the distinction, using Vergil to refer to the historical Vergil,
and Virgil to refer to the character in Dante’s poem.
65. Miserere [have mercy]: The Latin here derives most immediately from the
Psalms (especially Psalm 51 [Vulgate 50], liturgically the most important penitential psalm).
67. Nota man: Because dead, a disembodied soul. In Dante’s Christian Aristo-

telian view, a human being is the union of body and soul (see the note to 6.109—
111).
70. born sub Iulio: Publius Vergilius Maro was born in 70 B.c. at Andes, near
Mantua, then in Cisalpine Gaul; he died at Brundusium in 19 B.c., leaving the

Aeneid, on which he had spent eleven years, incomplete. At the order of Augustus,
Vergil’s literary executors disregarded the poet’s wish that it be burned. Vergil’s
other principal works are his pastoral Eclogues or Bucolics, which strongly influenced Dante, and his versified treatise on agriculture and husbandry, the Georgics,
which has left fewer apparent traces in Dante’s work. Vergil was born “under
Julius,” when Julius Caesar, born about 100B.c., had barely qualified for the Senate;

he was only twenty-six when Caesar was assassinated in 44 B.c. Although Caesar
was not in power at Vergil’s birth, Dante wishes to associate the poet of the Roman
empire with the figure that he considered its founder (see the note to 2.20—24).

72. false and lying gods: Chnistian opinion, based on Psalm 96.5 [Vulgate 95],
and established since Augustine, was that the gods of the pagan world (Jove, Juno,
Mars, etc.) were demons that had led humanity astray through the oracles, which
were silenced at Christ’s birth (see City of God 2.2, 2.10); certain individuals, such

as Plato and Aristotle, and often Vergil, were thought to have been essentially
monotheists though they used polytheistic terminology. Dante frequently uses the
names Jove and Apollo to refer to the Christian God (e.g., 31.92, Par. 1.13).

73-74. just son: Justice, the noblest of the moral virtues, is attributed to Aeneas,
son of the goddess Venus and Trojan Anchises, founder of Rome after the
destruction of Troy (“proud Ilion”) by the Greeks (see Aen. 1.544—45). Vergil
sang of Aeneas in his Aeneid, vessel of one of the Middle Ages’ most significant
myths: the descent of Europeans from Aeneas and other Trojans.

78. origin and cause of all joy: The mountain is designated as the origin of
happiness following Aristotle’s analysis of causation, in which the final cause (the
telos, the goal or end) is also the first cause (the arch¢ origin).

oy,

Inferno

79-80. are you that Virgil ... river of speech: That Vergil’s poetry was
like a great river was a traditional topic in ancient and medieval literary criticism. In the Middle Ages, the Aeneid, Georgics, and Eclogues were thought to
define the levels of poetic style: “tragic” or “high,” “middle” or “rustic,” and
“low” or “bucolic,” respectively.
79. are you that Virgil: Compare Aen. 1.617: “Tune ille Aeneas quem. . .”
[Are you that Aeneas whom . .], in Dido’s first speech to Aeneas.
85. You are my master and my author: The translation will uniformly translate maestro as “master,” though the word also means “teacher”; the modern
“author” no longer conveys the meaning the term autore had for the Middle Ages.
An auctor is one whose formative influence on others has been so great and so
widespread that he has acquired authority in the strongest possible (positive) sense:
he is “worthy of faith and obedience” (Convivio 4.6).

87. the pleasing style that has won me honor: There are traces of Vergil’s
stylistic influence on Dante as early as the Vita nuova (ca. 1294) and the rime petrose
(1296). Dante was already well known as a poet in 1300.
91. You must hold to another path: The pilgrim cannot proceed directly
up the mountain; he must first descend. See Romans 6.3—4:

Know ye not, that all we, who are baptized in Christ Jesus are baptized in
his death? For we are buried together with him by baptism into death:
that as Christ is risen from the dead by the glory of the Father, so we also
may walk in newness of life.
The penitential descent into Hell imitates Christ’s death on the Cross and is parallel to baptism, the sacramental death to sin, followed by “newness of life.” The

pattern by which the believer’s experience is a figural imitation of Christ is fundamental to the poem.
97. she has a nature

...

: Virgil’s account of the she-wolf, obscure as it is,

makes clear that, as the pilgrim sensed in line 51, she is a terrible external power
and a major force in history.
100. the animals with whom she mates: The language is that of the Old
Testament prophets, for whom unfaithfulness to Jehovah is “fornication” (cf.
Isoe21f jer Sal and Apocs1833):
101-5. the greyhound . . . felt: Innumerable explanations have been offered
of this prophecy. There are two main families of interpretation: (1) the greyhound refers to the Second Coming of Christ or to an ecclesiastical figure prefiguring it; (2) the greyhound refers to a secular ruler, who would also prefigure
the Second Coming. Prime candidates for the latter figure are Can Grande della
Scala, the Ghibelline leader of the Veronese noble house that offered Dante

hospitality during his exile (his title, derived from khan, also means “dog,” hence

38

Notes to Canto 1

greyhound), and Emperor Henry VII, whose descent into Italy in 1311 to 1313
seemed to Dante to promise, before his untimely death, the reform of religious
and political institutions for which he yearned. “Between felt and felt” has been
taken to mean a geographical location (between the towns of Feltre and
Montefeltro), an astrological sign (the Gemini, Dante’s own natal sign, were
sometimes shown with felt caps), the two mendicant orders (Franciscans and
Dominicans), and a technique of election (counters dropped into felt-lined boxes),
perhaps with reference to an emperor. Along with the prophecy in the last canto
of the Purgatorio (to which it is closely related), this passage remains one of the
most obscure in the poem. The best discussion is Davis 1976.
106. that humble Italy: Dante adapts Aen. 3.522—23, where the term humilis
[low-lying] refers to the physical appearance of the Italian shore as seen by Aeneas’s
crew. Note the contrast with line 75, “proud Ilion,” itself an echo of Aen. 3.2—3

(superbum/Ilium).
107-8. virgin Camilla . . . Nisus: Dante lists some of the fallen in the TrojanItalian war described in the last six books of Vergil’s epic, including Turnus, the
chief antagonist of Aeneas as rival for the hand of Lavinia. But Trojans (Nisus
and Euryalus) and native Italians (the Rutulian Turnus, the Volscian Camilla)

are carefully interwoven in Dante’s list, their former antagonisms elided. The
lines suggest patriotism as the motive of these deaths.
111. whence envy first sent her forth: See Wisdom 2.24: “by the envyof
the devil, death came into the world.” The devil’s envy of man’s favored status
is the traditional reason for his enmity.

117. the second death: The death of the soul in eternal damnation, following the first, physical death; for the expression, see Apoc. 20.15, 21.8.
118-19. content in the fire: Souls undergoing the fire of purgation. A metonymy for all of Purgatory, which includes a diversity of punishments; the identification of Purgatory with fire is traditional, resting on 1 Cor. 3.13-15 (“the
fire shall try every man’s work ... but he himself shall be saved, yet so as by
fire”).

120-26. the blessed people . . . into his city: The blessed are thought of as inhabiting, along with the angels, the “Empyrean,” a sphere of fire beyond the confines of the cosmos; this is “his city,” to which the pilgrim ascends in the Paradiso.
122. a soul more worthy: Unmistakably, Beatrice, the poet’s lady celebrated
in the Vita nuova (see 2.53).
124-25. that Emperor ... a rebel to his law: For the question of how
Virgil was a “rebel” against God’s law, see 4.33-39, with notes.
134. the gate of Saint Peter: The gate to Purgatory (see Purg. 9.73-145).

39

CANTO

#2

Lo giorno se n’andava, e l’aere bruno
toglieva li animai che sono in terra
da le fatiche loro; e i0 sol uno

m/’apparecchiava a sostener la guerra
si del cammino e si de la pietate,
che ritrarra la mente che non erra.
O muse, 0 alto ingegno, or m/alutate;

o mente che scrivesti cid ch’io vidi,
10

13

qui si parra la tua nobilitate.
Io cominciai: “Poeta che mi guidi,
guarda la mia virtu s’ell’ é possente,
prima ch’a l’alto passo tu mi fidi.
Tu dici che di Silvio il parente,
corruttibile ancora, ad immortale
secolo ando, e fu sensibilmente.

16

Pero, se l’avversario d’ogne male
cortese i fu, pensando l’alto effetto
ch’uscir dovea di lui, e ’] chi e ’] quale,

19

Wage

25

28

non pare indegno ad omo d’intelletto;
ch’ e’ fu de l’alma Roma e di suo impero
ne l’empireo ciel per padre eletto:
la quale e ’] quale, a voler dir lo vero,
fu stabilita per lo loco santo
u’ siede il successor del maggior Piero.
Per quest’ andata onde li dai tu vanto,
intese cose che furon cagione
di sua vittoria e del papale ammanto.
Andovvi poi lo Vas d’elezione,
per recarne conforto a quella fede
ch’é principio a la via di salvazione.

40

CANTO.
Fears—precedents for the journey—Virgil’s account of his being sent—
Beatrice’s account of her being sent

The day was departing, and the darkened air was
releasing all living creatures on the earth from their
toils; and I alone

10

13

16

prepared myself to undergo the war both of the
journey and of pity, which memory, unerring, will
depict.
O muses, O high wit, now help me; O memory
that wrote down what I saw, here will your nobility
appear.
I began: “Poet who are my guide, consider my
strength, if it is powerful enough, before you entrust
me to the deep pass.
You say that the father of Silvius, still in
corruptible flesh, went to the immortal realm and
was there with his senses.
Therefore, if the adversary of all evil was liberal to
him, considering the high effect that was to come
forth from him, and who and what he was,

ie)

22

25

28

it does not seem unworthy to a man of intellect;
for he in the Empyrean heaven had been chosen to
be father of mother Rome and her empire:
and Rome and her empire, to tell the truth, were
established to be the holy place where the successor
of great Peter is enthroned.
Through this journey that you claim for him, he
understood things that were the cause of his victory
and of the papal mantle.
Later the chosen Vessel went there, to bring back

strengthening for that faith which is the beginning of
the way of salvation.

41

Inferno _

31

Ma io, perché venirvi? o chi ’] concede?
Io non Enéa, io non Paulo sono;

me degno a cid né io né altri ’] crede.
34

Per che, se del venire io m’abbandono,

37

temo che la venuta non sia folle.
Se’ savio; intendi me’ ch’i’ non ragiono.”
E qual é quei che disvuol cio che volle

40

43

e per novi pensier cangia proposta,
si che dal cominciar tutto si tolle:
tal mi fec’ io ’n quella oscura costa,
perché, pensando, consumai la ’mpresa
che fu nel cominciar cotanto tosta.
“S’i ho ben la parola tua intesa,”

rispuose del magnanimo quell’ ombra,
“anima tua é da viltade offesa,

46

la qual molte fiate lomo ingombra
si che d’onrata impresa lo rivolve,
come falso veder bestia quand’ ombra.

49

Da questa tema accio che tu ti solve, »

52

dirotti perch’ io venni e quel ch’ io ’ntesi
nel primo punto di te mi dolve.
Io era tra color che son sospesi,
e donna mi chiamo beata e bella,

55

58

tal che di comandare io la richiesi.
Lucevan li occhi suoi pit che la stella;
e cominciommi a dir soave e piana,
con angelica voce, in sua favella:
“O anima cortese mantoana,

di cui la fama ancor nel mondo dura,

e durera quanto ’] mondo lontana,
61

l’amico mio, e non de la ventura,

64

ne la diserta piaggia € impedito
si nel cammin, che volt’ é per paura;
e temo che non sia gia si smarrito
ch’io mi sia tardi al soccorso levata,

67

per quel ch’i’ ho di lui nel cielo udito.
Or movi, e con la tua parola ornata
e con cio c’ha mestieri al suo campare,

l’aiuta si ch’i’ ne sia consolata.
42

Canto 2

31

But I, why come there? or who grants it? I am
not Aeneas, I am not Paul; neither I nor others

34

oH

40

43

46

49

52

55

58

believe me worthy of that.
Therefore, if I abandon myself to the journey, I fear
lest my coming may be folly. You are wise, you
understand better than I speak.”
And like one who unwills what he just now
willed and with new thoughts changes his intent, so
that he draws back entirely from beginning:
so did I become on that dark slope, for, thinking, I

gave up the undertaking that I had been so quick.to
begin.
“If I have well understood your word,” replied the
shade of that great-souled one, “your soul is
wounded by cowardice,
which many times so encumbers a man that he
turns back from honorable endeavor, as a false sight
turns a beast when it shies.
That you may free yourself from this fear, I will
tell you why I came and what I heard in the first
moment when I grieved for you.
I was among those who are suspended, and a lady
called me, so blessed and beautiful that I begged her
to command me.
Her eyes were shining brighter than the morning
star; and she began to speak gently and softly, with
angelic voice, in her language:
‘O courteous Mantuan soul, whose fame still lasts

in the world and will last as far as the world will go,
61

my friend, not the friend of fortune, on the

deserted shore is so blocked in his journey that he
has turned back for fear;
64

67

and I am afraid that he may be already so lost
that I have risen too late to help him, according to
what I have heard of him in Heaven.
Now go, and with your ornamented speech and
whatever else is needed for his escape help him so
that I may be consoled.

43

Inferno
y

70

73

76

I’ son Beatrice che ti faccic andare;

vegno del loco ove tornar disio;
amor mi mosse, che mi fa parlare.
Quando sar6 dinanzi al segnor mio,
di te mi lodero sovente a lui.’
Tacette allora, e poi comincia’ io:
‘O donna di virtu, sola per cui
l'umana spezie eccede ogne contento
di quel ciel c’ha minor li cerchi sui,

79

tanto m’aggrada il tuo comandamento
che l’ubidir, se gia fosse, m’é tardi;

82

85

piu non t’é uo’ ch’aprirmi il tuo talento.
Ma dimmi la cagion che non ti guardi
de lo scender qua giuso in questo centro
de l’ampio loco ove tornar tu ardi.’
‘Da che tu vuo’ saver cotanto a dentro,
dirotti brievemente,’ mi rispuose,

88

91

94

97

‘perch’ i’ non temo di venir qua entro.
Temer si dee di sole quelle cose
c’hanno potenza di fare altrui male;
de l’altre no, ché non son paurose.
I’ son fatta da Dio, sua mercé, tale

che la vostra miseria non mi tange,
né fiamma d’esto ’ncendio non m/assale.
Donna é gentil nel ciel che si compiange
di questo ’mpedimento ov’ io ti mando,
si che duro giudicio la su frange.
Questa chiese Lucia in suo dimando
e disse:—Or ha bisogno il tuo fedele
di te, e 10 a te lo raccomando.—

100

Lucia, nimica di ciascun crudele,
si mosse, e venne al loco dov’ i’ era,

che mi sedea con I’antica Rachele.
103

Disse:—Beatrice, loda di Dio vera,

106

ché non soccorri quei che t’amo tanto
ch’usci per te de la volgare schiera?
Non odi tu la pieta del suo pianto,
non vedi tu la morte che ’] combatte
su la fiumana ove ’] mar non ha vanto?—

44

Canto 2

70

We:
76

I am Beatrice who cause you to go; I come from
the place where I long to return; love has moved me
and makes me speak.
When I shall be before my lord, I will praise you
frequently to him.’ Then she was silent, and I began:
‘O lady of power, through whom alone the human
race rises above all the contents of that heaven whose
circles are smallest,

79

so pleasing to me is your command that obeying,
had it already taken place, is slow; no more is

82

needed than to unfold your desire.
But tell me the reason why you do not shrink
from coming down here, into this center, from the

85

spacious place where you desire to return.’
‘Since you wish to know so deeply, I will tell you
in brief,’ she replied, ‘why I do not fear to come

88

91

94

97

100

inside here.
One must fear only those things that have the
power to harm; not other things, for they are not
fearful.
I am made by God, in his mercy, such that your
misery does not touch me, the flame of this burning
does not assail me.
There is a noble lady in Heaven, who grieves for
this impediment to which I send you, so that she
vanquishes harsh judgment there on high.
She called Lucia in her request and said: —Now
your faithful one has need of you, and I put him in
your hands.—
Lucia, enemy of all cruelty, moved and came to
the place where I was sitting with the ancient Rachel.

103

She said:—Beatrice, true praise of God, why do

106

you not help him who loved you so, who because of
you came forth from the common herd?
Do you not hear the anguish of his weeping, do
you not see the death that attacks him there, by the
torrent where the sea has no boast?—

45

Inferno

109

112

115

118

121

124

Al mondo non fur mai persone ratte
a far lor pro o a fuggir lor danno,
com’ io, dopo cotai parole fatte,
venni qua git: del mio beato scanno,
fidandomi del tuo parlare onesto,
ch’onora te e quei ch’udito l’hanno.’
Poscia che m’ebbe ragionato questo,
li occhi lucenti lagrimando volse,
per che mi fece del venir piu presto.
E venni a te cosi com’ ella volse:
d’inanzi a quella fiera ti levai
che del bel monte il corto andar ti tolse.
Dunque che é? perché, perché restai,
perché tanta vilta nel core allette,
perché ardire e franchezza non hai,
poscia che tai tre donne benedette
curan di te ne la corte del cielo,

127

e 1 mio parlar tanto ben ti promette?”
Quali fioretti dal notturno gelo
chinati e chiusi, poi che ’] sol li ’mbianca,

si drizzan tutti aperti in loro stelo:
130

tal mi fec’ io di mia virtude stanca,
e tanto buono ardire al cor mi corse,

133

136

139

ch’i’ cominciai come persona franca:
“Oh pietosa colei che mi soccorse!
e te cortese ch’ubidisti tosto
a le vere parole che ti porse!
Tu mvhai con disiderio il cor disposto
si al venir con le parole tue,
ch’i’ son tornato nel primo proposto.
Or va, ch’un sol volere é d’ambedue:

tu duca, tu segnore e tu maestro.”
Cosi li disse; e poi che mosso fue,
142

intrai per lo cammino alto e silvestro.

46

Canto 2

109

In the world there have never been persons so
swift to seek their advantage or to flee their loss, as I,

112

115

118

121

124

127

130

133

136

139

after hearing such words spoken,
came down here from my blessed throne, trusting
in your virtuous speech, which honors you and those
who have heeded it.’
After she had spoken all this to me, she turned
her shining eyes, shedding tears, which made me
quicker to come here.
And I have come to you as she willed: from
before that beast I have taken you, that deprived you
of the short path up the mountain.
Therefore what is it? why, why do you stand
still? why do you nurse such cowardice in your
heart? why do you not have boldness and freedom,
seeing that three such blessed ladies have a care
for you in the court of Heaven, and my speech
promises you so much good?”
As little flowers, bowed and closed in the chill of

night, when the sun whitens them straighten up all
open on their stems:
so did I become with my tired strength, and so
much good boldness ran to my heart, that I began
like a person freed:
“Oh full of pity she who has helped me! and you
courteous, who have quickly obeyed the true words
she offered you!
Your words have so filled my heart with desire to
come with you, that I have returned to my first

purpose.
Now go, for one same will is in both: you are
leader, you lord, and you master.” So I said to him;

142

and when he had set forth
I entered upon the deep, savage journey.

Sa
47

NOTES

1-3. The day was departing ... and I alone: Like Canto 1, Canto 2
begins with an indication of time and of the pilgrim’s isolation; whereas he
slept in Canto 1, here he alone is awake. The contrast between the protagonist and the peace permeating nature draws on several passages in the Aeneid,
such as 8.26—27:
Nox erat et terras animalia fessa per omnis
alituum pecudumque genus sopor altus habebat,
cum pater...

[It was night and through all lands deep sleep held the tired
living creatures, the winged ones and the flocks,

while the father . . .]
and 9.224-25:

Cetera per terras omnis animalia somno
laxabant curas et corda oblita laborum

[Other creatures through all lands in sleep
loosened their cares and their hearts, forgetting their labors]
and compare 4.522-32.
7-9. O muses... appear: The appearance of an invocation to the muses here
retrospectively turns the entire first canto into a kind of propositio [announcement of subject]; compare the sequence of Vergil’s Aeneid, Book 1: lines 1-7,
proposition (“Arms and the man I sing. . .” ), and lines 8-11, invocation (“Muse,
remind [memora] me of the causes . . .”). The opening invocations of Purgatorio
and Paradiso constitute an ascending series with this one.

7-8. O muses, O high wit: The identification of the muses (the “daughters
of memory”) with the powers of the poet’s own mind or with the lore of the
craft was common in the Middle Ages. We use “wit” to translate Dante’s term

48

Notes to Canto 2

ingegno, regularly used by Dante to refer to the innate qualities of mind as opposed
to those acquired by practice or knowledge; the term is further discussed in the
notes to Par. 22.1-9.

8. O memory that wrote down: Dante’s word is mente [mind], closely related
in derivation to memoria (cf. memora [Aen. 1.8] and compare the English verb to
mind, as in “Mind your p’s and q’s”). Implicit here is the idea of memory as a
book, basic to the entire Vita nuova (see especially Chapter 1).
Chaucer adapted this and the following lines in the Prologue to Book 2 of
the House of Fame, lines 523-28:
O Thought that wrot al that I mette,
And in the tresorye hyt shette
Of my brayn, now shal men se
Yf any vertu in the be,
To tellen al my drem aryght.
Now kythe thyn engin and myght.
[O Thought that wrote down all I dreamed,

And shut it in the treasury
Of my brain, now shall men see

If there be any virtue in thee
To tell all my dream aright.
Now make known thy skill and might.]
The lines strongly suggest that Chaucer thought of the Comedy as a dream-vision
(see the notes to 1.2 and 1.11).

13. the father of Silvius: Silvius was the posthumous son (Aen. 6.760—66) of
Aeneas, whose journey to the underworld is related in Aeneid 6, one of Dante’s
chief models, especially for the Inferno. Here, as elsewhere, Dante writes as if he
considered the events of the Aeneid to be historical fact.

14-15. still... with his senses: That Aeneas journeyed to Hades in the flesh,
rather than in dream or in the spirit, is repeatedly emphasized in Vergil’s account. See, for example, Aen. 6.290—94, 413-14; at the end of the book, how-

ever, he leaves Hades by the gate of false dreams (lines 893-99).
17. the high effect: This is specified in lines 20—24. Line 19 may also be taken
to mean “he [Aeneas] does not seem unworthy.”

49

Inferno

20-24. for he... great Peter: Dante’s view that the Romans were a second
chosen people, and that the establishment of the Roman empire was part of God’s
providential preparation for the coming of Christ and the establishment of the
Church, underlies the entire Divine Comedy and is set forth in his Convivio (4.4—

5) and Monarchia (Book 2).

24. the successor of great Peter: The pope; Christ’s gift to Saint Peter of
the keys of the kingdom (Matt. 16.13—20) was interpreted by the Roman Church
as signifying Peter’s appointment as the first pope.
26-27. the cause . . . papal mantle: That is, Aeneas’s journey to the underworld was the cause of his victory in Latium and thus, according to Vergil, of
the Roman

empire; for Dante, the cause of the eventual establishment of the

papacy as well.

28. the chosen Vessel: Vas electionis, the phrase used by God to refer to Saul/
Paul in Acts 9.15. Saint Paul relates his vision of the “third heaven” in 2 Cor.
12.1-7. There is an account of Saint Paul’s visit to Hell in the fifth- or sixth-

century Latin “Apocalypse of Paul” (Visio Pauli; see Elliott).
32.
Iam not Aeneas, I am not Paul: After the periphrases oflines 13 and
28, the use of the names themselves is climactic. In addition to developing the
theme of the pilgrim’s fear (see below), the raising of this question serves to
emphasize the iconoclastic, in fact epoch-making importance of a journey to
the other world being claimed by a layman and politically active private individual.
43-45. If [have . . . cowardice: A continuation of the theme of the pilgrim’s
fear, a chief obstacle in Canto

1 (see 1.19, 44, 52, 90). The terzina opposes

magnanimity (largeness of spirit) with baseness or smallness of spirit, in this case
the pilgrim’s unwillingness to believe he is destined for great things and his
reluctance to trust Virgil; the concepts are discussed in Convivio 1.11, on the
basis of Aristotle’s Nichomachean Ethics (4.3).

52-117. I was among those . . . quicker to come here: Virgil answers the
pilgrim’s fears with an account of how he was sent to the pilgrim, which reveals
the hierarchical chain of mediation of God’s grace (Virgin Mary-Saint
Lucy—Beatrice—Virgil) that his presence implies. His authority is guaranteed by
his connection with the highest (God) via the hierarchical chain (note that his

knowledge of the upper levels is itself mediated by Beatrice’s account). On the

50

Notes to Canto 2

importance of the “great chain of being” in the Comedy, see Introduction,
pp. 18-20.

52. those who are suspended: The souls in Limbo (see Canto 4).
53-57. a lady . . . in her language: The style of Virgil’s description of Beatrice
derives from the lyric poetry of the dolce stil novo (itself deriving from the long
medieval tradition of narrative and lyric exaltation of ladies) and especially the
Vita nuova, which narrates Dante’s youthful love for her before and after her
death and establishes her status as a miracle. Florentine tradition, related by

Boccaccio, identified her with a Beatrice Portinari, a young married woman who
died on the appropriate day; the name Beatrice means “she who makes blessed.”
61. not the friend of fortune: That is, he loved her without regard to personal
advantage.
67. your ornamented speech: Virgil’s rhetorical power, praised also in lines
113-14 and exemplified in this entire account (see the note to line 126).
71. the place. . . return: The Empyrean (see the note to lines 120-26).
76-78.

O lady . . . smallest: This is the first reference in the poem to the alle-

gorical dimension of Beatrice; in addition to being the soul of the Florentine

lady Dante loved, she represents, variously, the principles of mediation, accommodation, revelation, and divine grace.

78. that heaven whose circles are smallest: That of the moon. Change was
thought to be confined to the sublunar realm, since all the heavenly bodies,
beginning with the moon, were perfect and changeless.
82-114. But tell me... those who have heeded it: Virgil’s question and
Beatrice’s answer reproduce the structure governing the canto as a whole: the
pilgrim’s question expressing his fears (lines 10-36) and Virgil’s answer, followed by its result (lines 43-142). Like Virgil, Beatrice answers a question about
fear of Hell (in this case, her own lack of it) with the narrative of how she was
sent.
91. your misery does not touch me: Beatrice’s use of the verb tangere [to touch]
echoes the risen Jesus’ words to Mary Magdalen (John 20.17): “Noli me tangere”
[Do not touch me].

Dl

Inferno

94. noble lady: The Virgin Mary.
97. Lucia: Saint Lucy of Syracuse, the patroness of vision (probably because her
name seems derived from the Latin word for “light’”). There has been much
discussion of the question of Dante’s devotion to her, about which nothing more
is known except her appearance helping Dante in Purg. 9.35-63 and Par.
32.136-38.

102. Rachel: The story of Jacob’s love for Rachel, for whom he served seven
years, and then another seven years when her older sister Leah was substituted
for her, is told in Genesis 29-30. The two sisters were traditionally interpreted
as symbolic of the contemplative life (Rachel) and the active life (Leah) (see
Purg. 27.94—108).
105. came forth . . . herd: That is, Dante’s love for Beatrice itself distinguished
him, and it also motivated him to seek acclaim as a poet.

108. the torrent ... no boast: A deliberately obscure line, variously interpreted; in our view, the reference is the same as in 1.26—27, “the pass that has

never yet left anyone alive,” in other words the abyss or flood of sin/Hell
(Boccaccio). On the assumption that the torrent is a separate river, however,

parallels have been suggested with Acheron andJordan, which do not flow into
the sea (Freccero 1966b).

126. my speech: Looking back on Virgil’s speech, one notes its formal rhetorical structure: proem with propositio (lines 43-51), narration (lines 52-120),
emotive peroration (lines 121-26). Despite the pilgrim’s disclaimer, the sanctions for his journey do strictly parallel the precedents of Aeneas and Saint Paul,
though with important differences. Of his two guides, Virgil is a representative
of the Roman empire, Beatrice of the Church. But the pilgrim’s claim on each
is that of an individual, a layman, not someone authorized by institutional sta-

tus: his claims are his devotion to Virgil’s poetry and his being himself a poet (cf.
1.79-87), which of course already place him in an exalted literary tradition,
though a secular one (the epoch-making decision to write in the vernacular is
also at stake here), and his human love for the earthly Beatrice (cf. 2.61, 103).
Virgil’s role in the pilgrim’s journey will be to prepare him for the coming of
Beatrice (implied in 1.121—23), a process analogous to the historical function of
Rome as Dante saw it, that of bringing the world under the rule of law in preparation for the coming of Christ. Though it seems to concern only the pilgrim’s
salvation, the passage in fact lays the foundation for the view of the poem as a
providentially inspired intervention in current history, set forth especially in

52

Notes to Canto 2

Paradiso 17 and 27. Jacoff and Stephany (1989) discuss many of the interpretive
issues in this canto.
127-132. As little flowers ... a person freed: The canto began with the
approach of night and the pilgrim’s fears; here, in simile, it is dawn again

(cf. 1.37-42).

oy)

CANTO

10

PER ME SI VA NE LA CITTA’ DOLENTE,
PER ME SI VA NE L’ETTERNO DOLORE,
PER ME SI VA TRA LA PERDUTA GENTE.
GIUSTIZIA MOSSE IL MIO ALTO FATTORE;
FECEMI LA DIVINA PODESTATE,
LA SOMMA SAPIENZA E’L PRIMO AMORE.
DINANZI A ME NON FUOR COSE CREATE
SE NON ETTERNE, E IO ETTERNO DURO.
LASCIATE OGNE SPERANZA, VOI CH’INTRATE.
Queste parole di colore oscuro
vid’ io scritte al sommo

13

16

19

3

d’una porta,

per ch’io: “Maestro, il senso lor m’é duro.”
Ed elli a me, come persona accorta:
“Qui si convien lasciare ogne sospetto,
ogne vilta convien che qui sia morta.
Noi siam venuti al loco ov’ i’ t’ho detto
che tu vedrai le genti dolorose
c’hanno perduto il ben de l’intelletto.”
E poi che la sua mano a la mia puose
con lieto volto, ond’ io mi confortai,

22

25

mi mise dentro a le segrete cose.
Quivi sospiri, pianti e alti guai
risonavan per l’aere sanza stelle,
per ch’io al cominciar ne lagrimai.
Diverse lingue, orribili favelle,
parole di dolore, accenti d’ira,
voci alte e fioche, e suon di man con elle

28

facevano un tumulto, il qual s’aggira
sempre in quell’aura sanza tempo tinta,
come la rena quando turbo spira.

54

CANTO.

3

Hell Gate—the trimmers—the Acheron—Charon and the damned

souls—the pilgrim’s faint

10

THROUGH ME THE WAY INTO THE GRIEVING CITY,
THROUGH ME THE WAY INTO ETERNAL SORROW,
THROUGH ME THE WAY AMONG THE LOST PEOPLE.
JUSTICE MOVED MY HIGH MAKER;
DIVINE POWER MADE ME,
HIGHEST WISDOM, AND PRIMAL LOVE.
BEFORE ME WERE NO THINGS CREATED
EXCEPT ETERNAL, ONES, AND I ENDURE ETERNAL.
ABANDON EVERY HOPE, YOU WHO ENTER.
These words I saw written with dark color above
a gate, and I said: “Master, their sense is hard for

me.”
13

16

i)

oD)

25

And he to me, like one alert: “Here one must

abandon every suspicion, every cowardice must die
here.
We have come to the place where I told you you
will see the grieving peoples who have lost the
good of the intellect.”
And, putting his hand on mine with a cheerful
glance from which I drew strength, he introduced me
into the secret things.
There sighs, weeping, loud wailing resounded
through the starless air, for which at the outset I shed

tears.
Strange languages, horrible tongues, words of
pain, accents of anger, voices loud and hoarse, and
sounds of blows with them,

28

made a tumult that turns forever in that air
darkened without time, like the sand when a

whirlwind blows.

ye)

Inferno.

31

E io ch’avea d’orror la testa cinta,

dissi: “Maestro, che é quel ch’ 1’ odo?
e che gent’ é che par nel duol si vinta?”
34

37

40

43

46

49

52

55

Ed elli a me: “Questo misero modo
tegnon I|’anime triste di coloro
che visser sanza ’nfamia e sanza lodo.
Mischiate sono a quel cattivo coro
de li angeli che non furon ribelli
né fur fedeli a Dio, ma per sé fuoro.
Caccianli i ciel per non esser men belli,
né lo profondo inferno li riceve,
ch’alcuna gloria i rei avrebber d’elli.”
E io: “Maestro, che € tanto greve
a lor che lamentar li fa si forte?”
Rispuose: “Dicerolti molto breve.
Questi non hanno speranza di morte,
e la lor cieca vita é tanto bassa
che ’nvidiosi son d’ogne altra sorte.
Fama di loro il mondo esser non lassa;

misericordia e giustizia li sdegna:
non ragioniam di lor, ma guarda e passa.”
E io, che riguardai, vidi una ’nsegna
che girando correva tanto ratta
che d’ogne posa mi parea indegna;
e dietro le venia si lunga tratta
di gente, ch’i’ non averei creduto
che morte tanta n’avesse disfatta.
Poscia ch’io v’ebbi alcuno riconosciuto,

vidi e conobbi |’ombra di colui
che fece per viltade il gran rifiuto.
61

Incontanente intesi e certo fui
che questa era la setta d’i cattivi,

64

67

a Dio spiacenti e a’ nemici sui.
Questi sciaurati, che mai non fur vivi,
erano ignudi e stimolati molto
da mosconi e da vespe ch’eran ivi.

Elle rigavan lor di sangue il volto,
che, mischiato di lagrime, a’ lor piedi

da fastidiosi vermi era ricolto.
56

Canto 3

31

34

37

And I, my head girt with horror, said: “Master,

what is this I hear? and what people is this who
seem so overcome by grief?”
And he to me: “This wretched measure is kept by
the miserable souls who lived without infamy and
without praise.
They are mixed with that cowardly chorus of
angels who were not rebels yet were not faithful to
God, but were for themselves.

40

The heavens reject them so as not to be less
beautiful, nor does deep Hell receive them, for the

43

46
49

52

DS

58

61

64

wicked would have some glory from them.”
And I: “Master, what is so grievous that it makes
them lament so loudly?” He replied: “I will tell you
very briefly.
They have no hope of death, and their blind life is
so base that they are envious of every other fate.
The world permits no fame of them to exist;
mercy and justice alike disdain them: let us not
speak of them, but look and pass on.”
When I looked again, I saw a flag running in
circles so rapidly that it seemed to scorn all pause;
and after it there came so long a train of people,
that I would not have believed death had undone so
many.
After I had recognized several, I saw and knew
the shade of him who in his cowardice made the
great refusal.
Immediately I understood and was certain that
this was the sect of cowards, displeasing both to God
and to his enemies.
These wretches, who never were alive, were naked

and much tormented by large flies and wasps that
were there.
67

These streaked their faces with blood which,

mixed with tears, at their feet was gathered up by
disgusting worms.

Df

Inferno

70

E poi ch’a riguardar oltre mi diedi,
vidi genti a la riva d’un gran fiume,

13

76

79

82

85

88

oil

94

per ch’io dissi: “Maestro, or mi concedi
i? sappia quali sono, e qual costume
le fa di trapassar parer si pronte,
com’ i’ discerno per lo fioco lume.”
Ed elli a me: “Le cose ti fier conte
quando noi fermerem li nostri passi
su la trista riviera d’Acheronte.”
Allor con li occhi vergognosi e bassi,
temendo no ’] mio dir li fosse grave,
infino al fiume del parlar mi trassi.
Ed ecco verso noi venir per nave
un vecchio, bianco per antico pelo,
gridando: “Guai a voi, anime prave!
Non isperate mai veder lo cielo:
i’ vegno per menarvi a l’altra riva
ne le tenebre etterne, in caldo e ’n gelo.
E tu che se’ costi, anima viva,

partiti da cotesti che son morti.”
Ma poi che vide ch’io non mi partiva,
disse: “Per altra via, per altri porti
verrai a piaggia, non qui, per passare:
piu lieve legno convien che ti porti.”
E 71] duca lui: “Caron, non ti crucciare:

vuolsi cosi cola dove si puote
cio che si vuole, e piu non dimandare.”
SY)

100

103

106

Quinci fuor quete le lanose gote
al nocchier de la livida palude,
che ’ntorno a li occhi avea di fiamme rote.
Ma quell’ anime, ch’eran lasse e nude,

cangiar colore e dibattero i denti,
ratto che ’nteser le parole crude.
Bestemmiavano Dio e lor parenti,
l’umana spezie e ’] loco e ’] tempo e 7] seme
di lor semenza e di lor nascimenti.
Poi si ritrasser tutte quante insieme,
forte piangendo, a la riva malvagia
ch’attende ciascun uom che Dio non teme.
58

Canto 3

70

And when I gazed beyond them, I saw people on
the bank of a great river; so I said, “Master, now

73

grant
that I may know who those are, and what
disposition makes them seem so ready to cross over,

76

US

82

as I can discern in spite of the weak light.”
And he to me: “These things will be made known
to you when we stay our steps on the gloomy shore of
Acheron.”
Then with eyes shamefast and cast down, afraid
that my speaking might displease him, I refrained
from speech until we reached the river.
And behold coming toward us in a boat an old
man, white with the hairs of age, crying: “Woe to
you, wicked souls!

85

Never hope to see the sky: I come to lead you to
the other shore, to the eternal shadows, to heat and

88

freezing.
And you who are over there, living soul, separate
yourself from these here, who are dead.” But when
he saw that I did not leave,

91

94

he said: “By another way, through other ports will
you come to shore, not by crossing here: a lighter
vessel must carry you.”
And my leader to him: “Charon, do not torture
yourself with anger: this is willed where what is
willed can be done, so ask no more.”

97

100

103

106

Then were quiet the woolly jowls of the pilot of
the livid swamp; around his eyes he had wheels of
flame.
But those weary, naked souls changed color and
gnashed their teeth, as soon as they heard his harsh
words.
They cursed God and their parents, the human
race and the place and the time and the seed of their
sowing and of their birth.
Then all of them together, weeping loudly, drew
near the evil shore that awaits each one who does
not fear God.
ay)

Inferno.

109

112

115

118

Caron dimonio, con occhi di bragia,

loro accennando tutte le raccoglie;
batte col remo qualunque s’adagia.
Come d’autunno si levan le foglie
luna appresso de l’altra, fin che ’] ramo
vede a la terra tutte le sue spoglie:
similemente il mal seme d’Adamo
gittansi di quel lito ad una ad una
per cenni, come augel per suo richiamo.
Cosi sen vanno su per l’onda bruna,
e avanti che sien di 1a discese,

anche di qua nuova schiera s’auna.
121

124

127

“Figliuol mio,” disse ’] maestro cortese,

“quelli che muoion ne lira di Dio
tutti convegnon qui d’ogne paese;
€ pronti sono a trapassar lo rio,
ché la divina giustizia li sprona
si che la tema si volve in disio.
Quinci non passa mai anima buona;
e pero, se Caron di te si lagna,

130

133

136

ben puoi sapere omai che ’] suo dir suona.”
Finito questo, la buia campagna
tremo si forte che de lo spavento
la mente di sudore ancor mi bagna.
La terra lagrimosa diede vento
che baleno una luce vermiglia
la qual mi vinse ciascun sentimento,
e caddi come I’uom cui sonno piglia.

60

Canto 3

109

Charon the demon, with eyes like glowing coals,
making signs to them, gathers them all in; he beats

with his oar whoever lingers.
ii?

As in autumn the leaves remove themselves one
after the other, until the branch sees all its raiment on

(Eilts)

118

121

the ground:
so the evil seed of Adam throw themselves from
that shore one by one, when beckoned to, each like a
falcon to its lure.
Thus they go off across the dark waves, and
before they have disembarked over there, over here
again a new flock gathers.
“My son,” said my courteous master, “those who
die in God’s anger all come together here from every
land;

124
W/

130

133

136

and they are ready to cross over the river, for
God’s justice so spurs them that fear turns to desire.
No good soul ever passes this way; and so, if
Charon complains of you, you can well understand
what his words mean.”
As he finished, the dark landscape trembled so
violently that in terror my memory bathes me again
with sweat.
The tearful earth gave forth a wind that flashed
with a crimson light which overcame all feeling in me,
and I fell like one whom sleep is taking.

a

61

NOTES

1-9. THROUGH ME ... YOU WHO ENTER: Like Vergil, Dante gives Hell both
an outer and an inner gate (see 8.68 and 9.104, with notes). The early com-

mentators identify the “speaking gate” as a personification; Morpurgo (1926;
cited in Simonelli 1993) studied the genre of “gate-inscriptions” in medieval
Latin; he found they typically include a statement of intent, often anaphorically
with per me [through me] (cf. lines 1-3); the name of the builder (cf. lines
4-6); and the date of building (cf. line 7). Compare John 10.9, where Christ
says, “I am the door [osteum]. Through me, if any man enter in, he shall be
saved.”
1. GRIEVING ciITy: The grieving city derives from the biblical personification of Jerusalem mourning its destruction in 586 B.c. See Lamentations
degre:
How doth the city sit solitary. .

. Weeping she hath wept in the night,

and her tears are on her cheeks: there is none to comfort her.

The destruction of Jerusalem was regarded by the exegetes as a figure of the Last
Judgment and thus as applicable to Hell (this figure is discussed further in the
note on 30.58—61). Dante quotes the first verse both in the Vita nuova (Chapter
29, on the death of Beatrice) and in a political epistle. That both Heaven and
Hell are referred to as cities (cf. 1.126, 128) derives from Augustine’s theory of

the Earthly and Heavenly Cities in the City of God.
5—6.

DIVINE POWER . . . PRIMAL LOVE: Power is the attribute of the Father, wis-

dom of the Son, and love of the Spirit: all creation is the work of the Trinity.
The central theme of the Inferno, of course, is the carrying out of God’s justice
on sin.

7-8. NO THINGS ... EXCEPT ETERNAL ONES: In Par. 29.22—36, Dante
notes that the three eternal creatures are the angels (pure form or act), prime
matter (pure potentiality), and the heavens (potentiality partially realized in
act).

7. CREATED: That Hell was prepared for the rebel angels is biblical (Matt. 25.41:
“the everlasting fire . . . was prepared for the devil and his angels”); the rebellion of the angels and their casting out from Heaven is mentioned in Apoc.
12:93

62

Notes to Canto 3

And that great dragon was cast out, that old serpent, who is called the devil
and Satan, who seduceth the whole world: and he was cast unto the earth,

and his angels were thrown down with him.
See also 2 Peter 2.4.

10. dark color: The expression can refer both to the appearance of the writing and to the obscure and harsh meaning (“rhetorical” color).
11. above a gate: The gate stands open, like that of Vergil’s Hades (Aen.
6.127: “noctes atque dies patet atri ianua Ditis” [all night and all day the gate
of black Dis stands open]), but for Dante it was not always so (see 4.52—63 and
note).
12. sense is hard: See John 6.61: “durus est hoc sermo” [this saying is hard],
said by the disciples hearing Christ offer his flesh as food. See also 9.61—63,
Purg. 8.19—22, with notes.

13-15. Here one must abandon . .. must die here: Note the antithesis
with line 9. The sense echoes the Sybil in Aen. 6.261: “Nunc animis opus,

Aenea, nunc pectore firmo” [Now there is need, Aeneas, of bravery, ofa strong
heart]; the relation between the pilgrim and his guide Virgil is patterned in
many respects on that between Aeneas and the Sybil. In this canto Dante alludes to or quotes Aeneas’s entrance into Hades (Aen. 6.261—414) more than
a dozen times.

18. good of the intellect: The intellectual vision of God. The Aristotelian
source of the phrase (Nichomachean Ethics 6.2.1139a) is quoted by Dante at
Convivio 2.13.6: “as the Philosopher says ..., the truth is the good of the
intellect.”
21. the secret things: Knowledge of the other world. Compare Aen. 6.264-67:
Di, quibus imperium est animarum, umbraeque silentes

et Chaos et Phlegethon, loca nocte tacentia late,

sit mihi fas audita loqui, sit numine vestro
pandere res alta terra et caligine mersas.
[Gods, whose power controls the shades [of the dead], and you, silent shadows,
and Chaos and Phlegethon, broad places silent in the night,
let it not be impious for me to speak things heard, let it be with your power
that I set forth things drowned in the deep earth and darkness.]

63

Inferno

22-27. loud wailing . . . sounds of blows: Compare Matt. 13.42: “There
shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth,” also echoed in line 101, where the
meaning of “chattering” includes “gnashing.” See also Aen. 6.557—59 (of the
gate to Tartarus):
Hinc exaudiri gemitus et saeva sonare
verbera, tum stridor ferri tractaeque catenae

[From there wailing and fierce blows were heard,
then the grating of irons and chains dragging]
23. starless air: Compare Aen. 6.534: “tristis sine sole domos” [gloomy sunless
dwellings]; the last word of each cantica of the poem is stars.

24. I shed tears: The first of the pilgrim’s varying emotional responses to Hell.
25. Strange languages, horrible tongues: The first hint of Hell’s kinship
with Babel, the place of confused speech.

29. darkened without time: Air darkened forever, beyond time.
31. my head girt with horror: In other words, the pilgrim’s scalp is bristling
(Latin horreo, to bristle) all around his head. The line echoes Aen. 2.559: “At me
tum primum saevus circumstetit horror” [Then a dreadful horror first encircled
me]; Aeneas is describing the decapitation of Priam, king of Troy.

36. without infamy and without praise: Dante’s journey will bring infamy
to those in Hell and renewed or better reputations to the blessed; but the neutrals

are barred from any preservation of their reputations or “names.” This verse is
usually taken as a reference to Apoc. 3:15—16, spoken by Christ the Judge in
reproof of Laodicea: “because thou art lukewarm, and neither cold nor hot, I
will begin to vomit thee out of my mouth” (see the note to line 64).

37-39. They are mixed . . . for themselves: The legend of the neutral angels,
mentioned in numerous medieval texts, including the Voyage of Saint Brendan,
goes back at least as far as Clement of Alexandria (Gmelin). This mixing of human
and angelic is not observed anywhere else in the poem.
39. but were for themselves: The rebel angels first averted themselves from
God and then actively turned to evil with Satan, but the neutrals, once averted

64

Notes to Canto 3

from God, did not act further (Freccero [1960] prefers the translation “stood by
themselves”); theirs is a “double negation,” and lines 36—52 offer a number of

examples where the double exclusion of the neutrals assumes a characteristic
syntactic form (Freccero 1983).
52-53. flag running in circles: The first instance of Dante’s contrapasso [countersuffering]—the fitting of the punishment to the sin (see 28.142). The flag acts as
the lure, the wasps and flies as prods or stimuli, punishing the neutrals’ purposelessness and lack of affiliation.
56-57. death had undone so many: The infinite number of the dead is a classical topos, discussed in the note to lines 112-17, but Dante’s point is more barbed.
Eliot translated this line in The Waste Land.

59-60. him who in his cowardice . . . great refusal: This unnamed soul has
been identified as Pontius Pilate, Esau, and a host of others. But Pietro dal
Morrone, the pious monastic reformer (he founded the order of Celestines)

elevated to the papacy in 1294 as Celestine V and canonized shortly after his
death, is the choice of the earliest commentators (the expression “saw and knew”
suggests that Dante had seen him, and Pietro was in Florence in 1280, though
the phrase is also used of Hector and Aeneas in Canto 4). Celestine is a plausible
candidate because his abdication cleared the way for the accession of Benedetto
Caetani as Boniface VIII, Dante’s corrupt enemy (see 19.52—-57, 27.85—105).
Celestine’s act would thus have been a “neutral” failure to oppose a patent evil,
resulting from vilta [cowardice] (see Virgil’s words to the pilgrim in 2.45), but
all identifications are inconclusive.
62-64.

sect of cowards ... wretches: The word for “coward” here, cattivo

(used also in line 37), still retained for Dante the meaning of “captive”
(cf. 30.16).
64. never were alive: See Apoc. 3.1 (of the Church at Sardis): “I know thy
works, that thou hast the name of being alive: and thou art dead.”

65-69. large flies and wasps . . . worms: In Dante’s day, flies, wasps, and
worms were thought to be born of putrefaction.
70-78. I saw people . . . Acheron: Dante clusters a number ofreferences to
Vergil’s poem in this part of the canto (a dozen in lines 70-105 alone), where
the subject is the boundary river of Hades, the Acheron (Dante has rearranged

65

Inferno

the traditional rivers of the underworld, which are not clearly distinguished in
Vergil’s treatment). Compare Aen. 6.318—20:
Dic, ait, o virgo, quid vult concursus ad amnem?
quidve petunt animae? Vel quo discrimine ripas
hae linquunt, illae remis vada livida verrunt?
[He says: Say, virgin, what means this crowding at the river?

what do the souls seek? Or by what decision
do these remain on the shore, while those others beat the dark waters with

oars?|
77-81. when we stay our steps . . . until we reached the river: See Aen.
6.295: “Hinc via Tartarei quae fert Acherontis ad undas” [From here the way
ied down to the waters of infernal Acheron], and 6.384: “Ergo iter inceptum
peragunt fluvioque propinquant” [They took up their journey again and
approached the river].

82-111. And behold . . . whoever moves slowly: In these lines, Dante adapts
Vergil’s portrait of Charon, the traditional ferryman of the Styx, Aen. 6.298—
305:
Portitor has horrendus aquas et flumina servat
terribili squalore Charon, cui plurima mento
canities inculta iacet, stant lumina flamma,

sordidus et umeris nodo dependet amictus.
Ipse ratem conto subigit velisque ministrat
et ferruginea subvectat corpora cumba,
iam senior, sed cruda deo viridisque senectus.
[A fearsome ferryman guards these waters, this river:
Charon. His filth is frightening, thick gray straggly
whiskers cover his chin; his eyes are flames.
A dirty cloak hangs from his shoulders by a knot.
With a pole he steers and tends the sail
of the iron-hued skiff that conveys the bodies across.
He is old now, but a god’s eld is green and raw.]
Note, in Dante’s text, 82 “old man” (cf. senior), 83 “white with hairs of age”

and 97 “woolly cheeks” (cf. canities mento inculta), 99 “wheels of flame,” “eyes
like glowing coals” (cf. stant lumina flammae). For this last, compare Apoc. 1.14:
“his eyes were as a flame of fire.”

66

Notes to Canto 3

Dante makes Charon a devil (line 109), as he does other figures from the

Vergilian/classical underworld, in keeping with biblical/Augustinian tradition
(see the note to 1.72).

88-89. living soul, separate yourself from these here: Compare Aen.
6391-94;
Fare age quid venias iam istinc, et comprime gressum.
Umbrarum hic locus est, somni noctisque soporae:
corpora viva nefas Stygia vectare carina.
[Say at once from there, why do you come, and halt your steps.
This is the place of shades, dreams, and the sleep of night:
it is sacrilege to carry living bodies in the Stygian hull.]

91-93. By another way ... must carry you: Aeneas crosses in Charon’s
boat, but how the pilgrim crosses Acheron is left unspecified. Charon’s words
imply that the pilgrim is destined for salvation. The “lighter vessel” appears in
Purg. 2.40—42.

95-96. this is willed ... ask no more: The first of several passages where
Virgil quells protest by invoking the theological commonplace of God’s
omnipotence (see 5.22—24, which are identical to these lines, and 7.10—12). These

lines have the distinction of being the first attested quotation from the Inferno,
found on the inside front cover of a register of criminal acts written in Bologna
by the notary Gano degli Useppi of San Gimignano in 1317 (this is important
evidence of the circulation of the Inferno during Dante’s lifetime [Livi 1918])
(see the note to 5.23).

103-5. They cursed God ... and of their birth: See Jer. 20.14: “Cursed
be the day wherein I was born: let not the day in which my mother bore me, be
blessed.” See also Job 3.1 and Hosea [Vulgate Osee] 9.11.
111.

beats with his oar: This vivid detail, not in Vergil, is vividly rendered

by Michelangelo in the Sistine Chapel’s Last Judgment.
112-17.

As in autumn

...

to its lure: See Aen. 6.309-12:

Quam multa in silvis autumni frigore primo
lapsa cadunt folia, aut ad terram gurgite ab alto
quam multae glomerantur aves, ubi frigidus annus
trans pontum fugat et terris immitit apricis.

67

Inferno

[As numerous as in the forest at the first chill of autumn,
the leaves fall, let loose, or on the land from the deep waves

the many birds gather, when the cold season
drives them overseas to warmer climes.]

This famous simile, in Vergil an imitation of Homer, was taken up by Milton
for the multitudes of rebel angels and by Shelley for dead leaves driven by
the West Wind. Where Vergil’s simile gives two views of large numbers—the
multitude of souls as dead leaves, as birds—for Dante the shift from one meta-

phor to the next (closely linked by the leaf and the bird being single) follows
the transformation in the souls, as their reluctance is changed into a desire to

cross.
115. the evil seed of Adam: Those of Adam’s descendants who are damned
(even those who did not sin voluntarily are damned by the sin inherited from
Adam unless redeemed by faith in Christ). The image draws on the medieval
commonplace of the tree of Adam’s progeny.
117. each like a falcon to its lure: Dante’s term is the generic uccello [bird],
but the reference is clear and is the first of a large number of images drawn
from falconry. Falconers used the lure, often consisting of shiny pieces of
metal that could be whirled by an attached cord, to recall their birds after the
hunt.
118. dark waves: Compare Aen. 5.2, “fluctusque atros.”
123. together here from every land: Dante gives itineraries for the soul after
death at 13.27 and Purg. 2.101—5; the idea of a gathering of birds, introduced in
the simile of lines 112-17, is still at work here, as in line 119.
125-26. God’s justice ... turns to desire: See the note to lines 112-17.
Compare Aen. 6.313-14:
stabant orantes primi transmittere cursum

tendebantque manus ripae ulterioris amore.
[the first stood praying to be taken across,
they stretched out their hands in desire for the farther shore.]
130-133. the dark landscape ... a wind: Medieval geology, based on
Seneca’s Natural Questions and Aristotle’s Meteorology, understood earthquakes
as the result of violent winds pent up in the earth (cf. Purg. 21.56—57); like winds

68

Notes to Canto 3

in the atmosphere, subterranean winds could produce lightning and thunder.
The cause of this subterranean wind would not seem to be natural.
131-32. my memory . . . with sweat: Another instance of the narrating poet’s
being caught again in the experience narrated, discussed in the note to 1.4-7.

136. one whom

sleep is taking: For other “sleeps” and “swoons” of the

pilgrim, see 1.2, 1.6, 5.142, and Purgatorio 9, 19, 27, and 31.

69

CANTO

10

4

Ruppemi I’alto sonno ne la testa
un greve truono, si ch’io mi riscossi
come persona ch’é per forza desta;
e l’occhio riposato intorno mossi,
dritto levato, e fiso riguardai
per conoscer lo loco dov’ io fossi.
Vero é che ‘n su la proda mi trovai
de la valle d’abisso dolorosa
che ’ntrono accoglie d’infiniti guai.
Oscura e profonda era e nebulosa
tanto che, per ficcar lo viso a fondo,

io non vi discernea alcuna cosa.
13

“Or discendiam qua git nel cieco mondo,”
comincio il poeta tutto smorto.
“To saro primo, e tu sarai secondo.”

16

19

2,

25

E io, che del color mi fui accorto,

dissi: “Come verro, se tu paventi
che suoli al mio dubbiare esser conforto?”
Ed elli a me: “L’angoscia de le genti
che son qua git, nel viso mi dipigne
quella pieta che tu per tema senti.
Andiam, ché la via lunga ne sospigne.”
Cosi si mise e cosi mi fé intrare
nel primo cerchio che l’abisso cigne.
Quivi, secondo che per ascoltare,

non avea pianto mai che di sospiri
che l’aura etterna facevan tremare;
28

cio avvenia di duol sanza martiri
ch’avean le turbe, ch’eran molte e grandi,

d’infanti e di femmine e di viri.

70

CANTO

4

First circle: Limbo—the unbaptized—Virgil’s account of the Harrowing
of Hell—the ancient poets—the Noble Castle—the illustrious pagans

Breaking the deep sleep within my head, a heavy
thunder-clap made me shake myself like one forcibly
awakened;

10

13

16

and I turned my rested eye about, standing erect,
and gazed fixedly, to know the place where I might
be.
In truth, I found myself on the brink of the
sorrowful valley of the abyss, which gathers in the
thundering of infinite woes.
Dark and deep it was, and so clouded that though
I probed with my sight to the bottom I discerned
nothing there.
“Now let us descend down here into the blind
world,” began the poet, all pale. “I will be first, and
you will be second.”
And I, who had perceived his color, said: “How
can I come, if you are afraid, who when I have fears

IES)

22

have ever brought me strength?”
And he to me: “The suffering of the peoples who
are here below, paints on my face that pity which
you perceive as fear.
Let us go, for the long way urges us.” So he put
himself, and so he made me enter, into the first circle

girding the abyss.
25

Here, as far as could be heard, there was no

weeping except of sighs which caused the eternal air
to tremble;
28

these resulted from grief without torture, felt by
the crowds, which were many and large, of infants
and of women and of men.

71

Inferno

31

34

Lo buon maestro a me: “Tu non dimandi
che spiriti son questi che tu vedi?
Or vo’ che sappi, innanzi che piu andi,
ch’ei non peccaro; e s’elli hanno mercedi
non basta, perché non ebber battesmo,

ch’é porta de la fede che tu credi;
37

es’e’ furon dinanzi al cristianesmo,

non adorar debitamente a Dio:
e di questi cotai son i0 medesmo.
40

Per tai difetti, non per altro rio,

43

semo perduti, e sol di tanto offesi
che sanza speme vivemo in disio.”
Gran duol mi prese al cor quando lo ’ntesi,
pero che gente di molto valore
conobbi che ’n quel limbo eran sospesi.

46

“Dimmi, maestro mio, dimmi, segnore,”

comincia’ io per volere esser certo
di quella fede che vince ogne errore:

49

52

55

58

“uscicci mai alcuno, o per suo merto,

o per altrui, che poi fosse beato?”
E quei, che ’ntese il mio parlar coverto,
rispuose: “Io era nuovo in questo stato,
quando ci vidi venire un possente
con segno di vittoria coronato.
Trasseci l’ombra del primo parente,
d’Abél suo figlio e quella di Noé,
di Moise legista e ubidente,
Abraam patriarca e David re,
Israel con lo padre e co’ suoi nati
e con Rachele, per cui tanto fé,

61

64

67

e altri molti, e feceli beati.

E vo’ che sappi che, dinanzi ad essi,
spiriti umani non eran salvati.”
Non lasciavam I’andar perch’ ei dicessi,
ma passavam la selva tuttavia,
la selva, dico, di spiriti spessi.
Non era lunga ancor la nostra via
di qua dal sonno, quand’ io vidi un foco
ch’emisperio di tenebre vincia.
TZ

Canto 4

ail

34

37

40

43

46

49

By

55

My good master to me: “You do not ask what
spirits are these you see? Now I wish you to know,
before you walk further,
that they did not sin; and if they have merits, it is

not enough, because they did not receive baptism,
which is the gateway to the faith that you believe.
And if they lived before Christianity, they did not
adore God as was needful: and of this kind am I
myself.
Because of such defects, not for any other
wickedness, we are lost, and only so far harmed that
without hope we live in desire.”
Great sorrow seized my heart when I understood
him, because I knew that people of great worth were
suspended in that limbo.
“Tell me, my master, tell me, lord,” I began,

wishing to be assured of that faith which overcomes
all error:
“has anyone ever gone forth from here, either
through his own merit or through another, so as to
become blessed?” And he, who understood my
veiled speech,
replied: “I was still new in this condition, when I
saw a powerful one come, crowned with a sign of
victory.
He led forth from here the shade of our first
parent, of Abel his son, and that of Noah, of Moses,

58

lawgiver and obedient,
Abraham the patriarch and David the king, Israel
with his father, and his children, and Rachel, for
whom he did so much,

61

64

67

and many others, and he made them blessed.
And I would have you know that before them no
human spirits were saved.”
We did not cease walking because he spoke, but
kept on passing through the wood, the wood, I say,
of crowding spirits.
Our way had not led far from where I had slept,
when I saw a fire that overcame a hemisphere of
shadows.
73

Inferno

70

Di lungi n’eravamo ancora un poco,
ma non si ch’io non discernessi in parte
ch’orrevol gente possedea quel loco.

73

76

“O tu ch’onori scienzia e arte,

questi chi son c’hanno cotanta onranza,
che del modo de li altri li diparte?”
E quelli a me: “L’onrata nominanza
che di lor suona su ne la tua vita,

eo

82

grazia acquista in ciel che si li avanza.”
Intanto voce fu per me udita:
“Onorate l’altissimo poeta:
l’ombra sua torna, ch’era dipartita.”
Poi che la voce fu restata e queta,

vidi quattro grand’ombre a noi venire:
85

sembianz’ avevan né trista né lieta.
Lo buon maestro comincio a dire:

“Mira colui con quella spada in mano,
che vien dinanzi ai tre si come sire:
88

quelli € Omero, poeta sovrano;
Valtro é Orazio satiro che vene;

Ovidio é ’] terzo, e l’ultimo Lucano.
On

94

Pero che ciascun meco si convene
nel nome che sono la voce sola,
fannomi onore, e di cid fanno bene.”
Cosi vid’ i’ adunar la bella scola

di quel segnor de l’altissimo canto
che sovra li altri com’ aquila vola.
Dif

Da ch’ebber ragionato insieme alquanto,
volsersi

a me con salutevol cenno,

e ’] mio maestro sorrise di tanto;
100

e pit d’onore ancora assai mi fenno,
ch’e’ si mi fecer de la loro schiera,

si ch’io fui sesto tra cotanto senno.
103

Cosi andammo infino a la lumera,

106

parlando cose che ’] tacere é bello,
si com’ era ’] parlar cola dow’ era.
Venimmo al pie d’un nobile castello,
sette volte cerchiato d’alte mura,

difeso intorno d’un bel fiumicello.
74

Canto 4

70

Th)

76

WS)

We were still some distance from it, but not so far

as to keep me from discerning in part that people worthy
to be honored possessed that place.
“O you who honor knowledge and art, who are
these who receive so much privilege as to be
separated from the manner of the others?”
And he to me: “The honor with which their names
resound up in your life, wins grace in Heaven that
thus advances them.”
Meantime a voice was heard by me: “Honor the
highest poet: his shade returns, that had departed.”

82

When the voice had ceased and was silent, I saw

85

four great shades coming toward us: their expression
was neither sad nor happy.
My good master began to speak: “Behold the one
with that sword in his hand, coming in front of the
other three as if their lord:

88

that is Homer, the supreme poet; the next is

Horace the satirist; Ovid is the third, and the last,
91

94

Qik

Lucan.
Because they all share with me that name which
the single voice pronounced, they do me honor, and
in this they do well.”
So saw I come together the lovely school of that

lord of highest song, who soars above the others like
an eagle.
When they had spoken together for a time they
turned to me with sign of greeting, and my master
smiled at that;

100

and they did me an even greater honor, for they
made me one of their band, so that I was sixth

103

106

among so much wisdom.
Thus we went as far as the light, speaking things
of which it is good to be silent now, as it was good
to speak them there where I was.
We came to the foot ofa noble castle, seven times

encircled by high walls, defended all around by a
lovely little stream.

WB

Inferno

109

Questo passammo come terra dura;
per sette porte intrai con questi savi;

112

ils

giugnemmo in prato di fresca verdura.
Genti v’eran con occhi tardi e gravi,
di grande autorita ne’ loro sembianti:
parlavan rado, con voci soavi.
Traemmoci cosi da l’un de’ canti
in loco aperto, luminoso e alto,
si che veder si potien tutti quanti.

118

Cola diritto, sovra ’] verde smalto,

121

mi fuor mostrati li spiriti magni,
che del vedere in me stesso m’essalto.
I’ vidi Eletra con molti compagni,
tra ’’ quai conobbi Ettor ed Enea,
Cesare armato con li occhi grifagni.

124

127

Vidi Cammilla e la Pantasilea;

da l’altra parte vidi ’] re Latino,
che con Lavina sua figlia sedea.
Vidi quel Bruto che caccio Tarquino,
Lucrezia, Iulia, Marzia e Corniglia;

e solo, in parte, vidi ’] Saladino.
130

133)

136

19

Poi ch’innalzai un poco pit le ciglia,
vidi ’] maestro di color che sanno
seder tra filosofica famiglia.
Tutti lo miran, tutti onor li fanno:

quivi vid’ io Socrate e Platone,
che ’nnanzi a li altri pit presso li stanno,
Democrito che ’] mondo a caso pone,
Diogenés, Anassagora e Tale,
Empedocles, Eraclito e Zenone;
e vidi il buono accoglitor del quale,
Diascoride dico; e vidi Orfeo,
Tulio e Lino e Seneca morale,

142

Euclide geometra e Tolomeo,
Ipocrate, Avicenna e Galieno,

Averois che ’] gran comento feo.
145

Io non posso ritrar di tutti a pieno,

pero che si mi caccia il lungo tema
che molte volte al fatto il dir vien meno.
76

Canto 4

109

This we passed over like solid ground; through
seven gates I entered with these sages; we came into
a meadow of fresh green.

dn

Here were people with slow, grave eyes and great
authority in their countenances: they spoke seldom,
and with soft voices.
Therefore we drew to one side, to a place open,

Tits

bright, and high, whence all of them could be seen.
118

121

There opposite, on the bright green grass, all the
great spirits were shown to me, so that I am still
exalted within myself at the sight.
I saw Electra with many companions, among
whom I recognized Hector and Aeneas, Caesar in

armor with hawklike eyes.
124

I saw Camilla and Penthesilea; on the other side I

saw King Latinus, who was sitting with Lavinia his
daughter.
7

I saw the Brutus who drove Tarquin out, Lucretia,

Julia, Marcia, and Cornelia; and alone, to the side,
130

133

Saladdin.
When I lifted my brow a little higher, I saw the
master of those who know, sitting among a
philosophical company.
All gaze at him, all do him honor: there I saw
Socrates and Plato, standing closer to him, in front of
the others,

136

Democritus, who assigns the world to chance,
Diogenes, Anaxagoras, and Thales, Empedocles,
Heraclitus, and Zeno;

139

and I saw the good gatherer of qualities,
Dioscorides I mean; and I saw Orpheus, Tullius and

Linus, and Seneca the moralist,
142

145

Euclid the geometer and Ptolemy, Hippocrates,
Avicenna and Galen, Averroés who made the great
commentary.
I cannot describe them all in full, because my long
theme so drives me that often the word falls short of the
fact.

77

Inferno

148

La sesta compagnia in due si scema:
per altra via mi mena il savio duca

fuor de la queta, ne l’aura che trema.
151

E vegno in parte ove non é che luca.

78

Canto 4

148

151

The company of six is reduced to two: along
another way my wise leader conducts me out of the
quiet, into the trembling air.
And I came to a place there is nothing to give light.

se

Te

NOTES

1. the deep sleep: Echoing 3.136, and recalling also 1.2 and 1.11.

2. a heavy thunder-clap: Perhaps the sound of the lightning flash of 3.134.
Except for line 67, no further reference is made to either passage.
8. valley of the abyss: The expression “pit of the abyss” (the “abyss” is literally the “bottomless’’) is biblical (Apoc. 9.1—2).
11. I probed with my sight: According to Plato, vision results from the joining
of light emitted by the eye with external light. Aristotle conclusively refuted this
view, as Dante noted in Convivio 3.9, but his terminology regularly reflects it.
14-21. all pale... you perceive as fear: Virgil’s pity seems restricted to the
souls in Limbo. Though it is not fear that causes his pallor here, it does cause it
later (see 9, 1-3).
24. the first circle: The existence of a Limbo (the term means “edge” or
“fringe”) for unbaptized children and for the faithful waiting for Christ was
asserted by the fathers of the Church; Aquinas placed it underground, below
Purgatory (also underground) but above Hell itself (Summa theol. Suppl., q. 94).
Dante’s placing unbaptized adults and virtuous pagans there is original with him
and contrary to Church doctrine. The best discussion is Padoan 1970.

29-30. the crowds ... and of men: There is an echo here of Vergil’s
description of the dead crowding the shores of Styx (Aen. 6.306-8), which Dante
also drew on in 3.70-78:
matres atque viri defunctaque corpora vita
magnanimum heroum, pueri innuptaeque puellae,
impositique rogis luvenes ante ora parentum

[mothers and men and the bodies reft of life
of great-souled heroes, boys and unwedded girls,
youths placed on the pyre before the eyes of their parents]

34-42. they did not sin ... live in desire: For Dante, beatitude cannot
be earned but is the result of a free gift by God predicated on faith in Christ
(strictly speaking, faith itself is a gift of grace), though faith alone, without works,
is insufficient (Dante will give numerous instances oflate repentants who are

80

Notes to Canto 4

saved, however). “Merits” refers to deserving acquired by works; Virgil may
seem to imply that those who lived before Christ were saved if they “adored”
God (or “prayed” to him) rightly; in Paradiso 19, in a passage about the salvation of a Trojan from the time of the Trojan War, the pilgrim is told that no
one has ever been saved without believing in Christ. Dante’s theory of salvation, thoroughly orthodox in medieval terms (unlike his Limbo), is set forth
in Paradiso 7.
35-36. baptism, which is the gateway: This is a traditional metaphor; as
Dante writes in Par. 25.10—11, by baptism he “entered into the faith.” See also
Inferno 19, especially lines 16-21.
39. and of this kind am I myself: Virgil identifies himself as one who, living
before Christianity, “did not adore God as was needful”; since he has explicitly
stated that the souls in Limbo “did not sin” (line 34), his account here really
does not explain his statement (1.123) that he was “a rebel” against God’s law.

This question hovers over Dante’s entire portrayal of Virgil (see, with notes,
Cantos 8 and 9 and Purgatorio 21, 22, and 30).

42. without hope we live in desire: They desire the beatific vision of God
but cannot hope to reach it; compare with Augustine, Confessions 1.1: “you have
made us for yourself, and our heart is unquiet until it rest in you.”
47-50. assured of that faith . . . to become blessed: Lines 47—48 can be
taken to mean that the pilgrim desires a high degree of certainty or that he desires
clarification of his Christian belief. Chiavacci Leonardi suggests that his question reflects Dante’s awareness that Christ’s descent into Hell (between his death

and resurrection) had been made an article of faith only in 1215 (reasserted in
1274); he is obviously asserting it as correct.

52-63. I was still new . . . no human spirits were saved: Virgil’s account
refers to the so-called Harrowing of Hell, narrated in the apocryphal Gospel of
Nicodemus (third century a.D.), itself based on scattered biblical passages (e.g.,
Eph. 4.9) and no doubt founded on earlier beliefs: Christ was supposed to have
descended into the underworld, violently breaking down its outer gate
(cf. 3.1-12) against the opposition of the devils, and to have led to Heaven in
triumph the souls of all those who had believed the prophecies of his future
coming. This theme became one of the most widely represented in the Middle
Ages, in poems, mosaics, sculptures, paintings, and plays. The Byzantine anastasis,
the earliest type of pictorial representation of the triumphant Christ, showed him
trampling the shattered gates of Hell (and, underneath them, Satan) while tak-

ing by the hand Adam at the head ofa line of Old Testament figures; good examples are the apse mosaic at Torcello and the internal mosaic at San Marco in
Venice (reproduced in Singleton, plate 2).

81

Inferno

52. I was still new: Vergil died in 19 B.c.; by Dante’s reckoning he would
have been dead for about fifty-two years when Christ died.
53. a powerful one: Virgil does not seem to have recognized Christ as anything more than a man; Augustine (Enarrationes in Psalmos, 48.1.5) expressed the
view that at the Last Judgment the damned would not be able to see Christ’s
divinity (see the note to 34.115).
54. crowned ... victory: Virgil probably saw a classical laurel wreath rather
than the cruciform nimbus, a sign of divinity, which crowns the triumphant Christ
in the anastasis and later images (see previous note); the line may echo Hebrews
2.9: “But we see Jesus . . . crowned with glory and honor.”
59-60. Israel . .. did so much: Jacob (named Israel after his struggle with
the angel, Gen. 32.28), his father Isaac, his twelve sons (the progenitors of the

twelve tribes of Israel), and his wife Rachel (see the note to 2.100).

69. a fire ... shadows: The hemisphere of light is a symbol both of the
enlightenment achieved by classical civilization and of the knowledge (the
memory) of the classical world possessed by Dante and his contemporaries
(the “honorable mention,” or fame, of line 76). Although Dante realized that
his time possessed only fragmentary knowledge of antiquity, he could not have
foreseen that the generation of Petrarch (1304-1374) and Boccaccio (1308-1375)
would double the number of ancient texts accessible to readers and consequently
further revolutionize European conceptions of history.

88. Homer: Dante had no direct knowledge of Homer or any other Greek poets;
his ideas were derived from Anistotle, Cicero, Vergil, and other Latin authors. He

apparently knew nothing of Aeschylus, Sophocles, Pindar, or Sappho, to mention
only a few (Euripides and several others are mentioned in Purg. 22.106—7).
89. Horace the satirist: Quintus Horatius Flaccus (65-8 B.c.) was, with Vergil,

the leading poet of the Augustan age. Dante refers to the Ars poetica, which circulated separately, in De vulgari eloquentia 2.4.4 but never mentions the other
Epistles or the Odes.
90. Ovid . . . Lucan: Publius Ovidius Naso (43 B.c.—ca. a.D. 17) and Marcus
Annaeus Lucanus (A.D. 39-65). Dante knew all or most of Ovid’s works, of which
he most frequently cites the Metamorphoses; Lucan is the author of the Pharsalia,
an epic on the civil war between Caesar and Pompey. The only major Latin
epic poet omitted here is Statius, whom we meet in Purgatory; Dante does not

seem to have known Propertius.
98-105. they turned to me... there where I was: A transparent autobiographical allegory, referring to Dante’s learning the craft of poetry by studying

82

Notes to Canto 4

the ancients and his conviction that he is worthy of their company (no false
modesty here).

102. so that I was sixth: The phrase seems to echo Ovid’s naming of himself
as fourth in the line of elegiac poets in Tristia 4.10.54: “fourth of these in the
succession of time was I myself.” There is, no doubt, a numerological significance in the pilgrim’s being sixth; in the Purgatorio, with the addition of Statius,
he becomes seventh (for the significance in the poem of the number seven, see
the notes to Purgatorio 17).

106. a noble castle: Like the hemisphere of light, this is another symbol of
classical civilization, usually identified as the castle of wisdom, the seven walls

symbolizing the seven classical virtues (four moral, the so-called cardinal virtues: prudence, temperance, fortitude, and justice; three intellectual: understanding, knowledge, and, again, prudence), the seven gates symbolizing the seven
liberal arts (the Trivium [triple path], arts of language: grammar, rhetoric, and
dialectic; and the Quadrivium [fourfold path], sciences of the cosmos: music,
arithmetic, geometry, and astronomy), also inherited from antiquity (see Curtius

1953). The stream is often glossed as representing eloquence; several early commentators take it to refer to worldly temptations which must be shunned for the
sake of learning. As the early commentators point out, the green meadow derives
from Vergil’s Elysian Fields (Aen. 6.637—892).
115-17. Therefore we drew . . . could be seen: The elevation from which
the group contemplate the great souls of antiquity seems to echo the hill from
which Aeneas and Anchises see the future heroes of Rome

(Aen. 6.754-—55).

118-20. There opposite ... at the sight: At the autobiographical level of
the allegory, the entire episode of the hemisphere of light must of course refer
to Dante’s reading of classical writers and his acquisition of classical lore. Along
with lines 97-102, this is a clear expression of the excitement he felt.

121. Electra: Not the daughter of Agamemnon but of Atlas; she was the
mother of Dardanus, a founder of Troy (Aen. 8.134—-35; Dante refers to her

again in Monarchia 2.3.2). She is appropriately grouped with the Trojans Hector and Aeneas and with Julius Caesar (descended, according to Vergil, from
Aeneas).

124-26.

Camilla ... Lavinia his daughter: Figures from the Aeneid (cf.

1.107—8): Camilla and Penthesilea are virgin warriors: Camilla, an invention of

Vergil’s, is an ally of the Latins (Aen. 7.803—17, 11.648-835), and Penthesilea,
the queen of the Amazons, was an ally of Troy according to a Greek tradition
mentioned by Vergil (Aen. 1.490—93). King Latinus, the king of the Latins,
betrothed his daughter to Aeneas before hostilities broke out; from the union of

Trojans and Latians sprang the Romans.

83

Inferno |

127-29. Brutus . . . Cornelia: Figures from Roman history, known to Dante
from Livy, Lucan, and others. Tarquin, according to Roman tradition, was the
last of the kings; his son’s rape of Lucretia resulted in their expulsion and the
founding of the republic, which Dante notes in Convivio 4.5.12 as lasting from
Brutus, its first consul, to Julius Caesar. Cornelia was Julius Caesar’s wife and
the mother ofJulia, who was married to Pompey the Great. Marcia was the wife
of Cato the Younger, whom we meet in Purgatorio 1.
129. Saladdin: Saladdin (Salah ad-Din, 1137-1193) was the sultan of Egypt
who drove the Crusaders entirely out of the Holy Land, except for the fortress
of Acre, which fell in Dante’s day. Many stories and legends gathered about this
impressive figure; Dante mentions him in Convivio 4.11.14 as an example of
liberality.
130. When I lifted my brow a little higher: The heroes of the contemplative life—philosophers, poets, and scientists—are placed higher than those of the
active life.
131. the master of those who know: Aristotle (384—322 B.c.), widely known
simply as “the philosopher,” all of whose surviving works had by Dante’s time
been translated into Latin. One of the most impressive achievements of the Middle
Ages was the assimilation and mastery during the twelfth and thirteenth centuries of all the works of Aristotle.

134. Socrates and Plato: Dante knew Plato only indirectly, mainly through
Augustine’s adaptation of Neoplatonic lore, except for the incomplete translation of the Timaeus by the fourth- or fifth-century Christian bishop Calcidius,
who also wrote a commentary on it. Although Dante makes Plato subordinate
to Aristotle, the “Aristotle” he knew was more Platonic than not, since, in common with his time, Dante ascribed to him several works by late followers of Plato

and read him in a Neoplatonic key.
136-38. Democritus ... Zeno: Diogenes and Zeno Dante had read of in
manuals; the others are pre-Socratics discussed by Aristotle in his Physics in order
to refute their views.
139. Dioscorides: The traditional author of the most widely used collection
of works on materia medica; the qualities referred to are those of plants.

140-42. Orpheus . . . Seneca: Orpheus and Linus are legendary poets mentioned in Vergil’s Eclogues and Georgics; Tullius is Marcus Tullius Cicero (106—
46 B.c.); Seneca the moralist is Lucius Annaeus Seneca the younger (4 B.c.—A.D.
65), also the author of tragedies. Some works by both Cicero and Seneca were
known to Dante. The inclusion of poets among philosophers reflects the

84

Notes to Canto 4

Ciceronian tradition of identifying poetry with wisdom, as well as the fact that
many of the pre-Socratics wrote in verse.

142-44. Euclid . . . Averroés: Scientists and philosophers, all translated into
Latin. Euclid’s (third century B.c.) Elements and Optics were widely studied in
Dante’s time. Ptolemy’s (second century A.D.) Almagest was the leading astronomical textbook, as his Tetrabiblos was the dominant influence in astrology.

Hippocrates (fifth century B.c.) was the most famous physician of ancient Greece,
to whom works by many authors were ascribed. Galen (second century A.D.)
was the founder of experimental medicine; his influence dominated European
medicine from the late Middle Ages into the seventeenth century.
Dante treats the Muslim philosophers almost as extensions of Greco-Roman
civilization. Avicenna (Ibn-Sina, d. 1036) was the leading Muslim Neoplatonic
philosopher and the author of an influential handbook of medicine that Dante
probably knew. The Spanish Arab Averroés (Ibn-Rushd, d. 1198), who suffered persecution from the Islamic fundamentalists of his day, was the greatest of
the medieval commentators on Aristotle, widely known simply as “the Commentator” (the “great commentary” refers to his commentary on Aristotle’s De
anima); the extent to which Dante accepted his influential doctrine of the unity
of the intellect (combatted by Aquinas) has been hotly debated.

85

CANTO

5

Cosi discesi del cerchio primaio
git nel secondo, che men loco cinghia
e tanto piu dolor che punge a guaio.
Stavvi Minos orribilmente, e ringhia;

essamina le colpe ne l’intrata;
giudica e manda secondo ch’avvinghia.
Dico che quando |’anima mal nata
li vien dinanzi, tutta si confessa;
10

13

16

e quel conoscitor de le peccata
vede qual loco d’inferno é da essa;
cignesi con la coda tante volte
quantunque gradi vuol che git sia messa.
Sempre dinanzi a lui ne stanno molte;
vanno a vicenda ciascuna al giudizio,
dicono e odono e poi son git volte.
“O tu che vieni al doloroso ospizio,”
disse Minos a me quando mi vide,
lasciando |’atto di cotanto offizio,

19

22

25

“guarda com’ entri e di cui tu ti fide:
non t’inganni l’ampiezza de l’intrare!”
E ’] duca mio a lui: “Perché pur gride?
Non impedir lo suo fatale andare:
vuolsi cosi cola dove si puote
cid che si vuole, e pit non dimandare.”
Or incomincian le dolenti note
a farmisi sentire; or son venuto

28

la dove molto pianto mi percuote.
Io venni in loco d’ogne luce muto,
che mugghia come fa mar per tempesta,
se da contrari venti é combattuto.

86

GaN
Minos—second circle: the lustful—Francesca da Rimini and
Paolo Malatesta

Thus I descended from the first circle down to the
second, which encloses a smaller space, but so much
more suffering that it goads the souls to shriek.
There stands Minos bristling and snarling: he
examines the soul’s guilt at the entrance; he judges
and passes sentence by how he wraps.
I say that when the ill-born soul comes before
him, it confesses all; and that connoisseur of sin
10

its

16

19

22.

sees which is its place in Hell; he girds himself
with his tail as many times as the levels he wills the
soul to be sent down.
Always many stand before him; each goes in turn
to judgment, they speak and hear and are cast into
the deep.
“O you who come to the dolorous hospice,” said
Minos when he saw me, leaving off the exercise of
his great office,
“beware how you enter and to whom you entrust
yourself: be not deceived by the spacious entrance!”
And my leader to him: “Why still cry out?
Do not impede his going, which is decreed: this is
willed where what is willed can be done, so ask no

25

more.”
Now the grief-stricken notes begin to make
themselves heard; now I have come where much

weeping assails me.
28

I came into a place where all light is silent, that
groans like the sea in a storm, when it is lashed by
conflicting winds.

87

Inferno
oil

34

La bufera infernal, che mai non resta,

mena li spirti con la sua rapina;
voltando e percotendo li molesta.
Quando giungon davanti a la ruina,
quivi le strida, il compianto, il lamento;

Sy

40

43

bestemmian quivi la virtu divina:
Intesi ch’a cosi fatto tormento
enno dannati 1 peccator carnali,
che la ragion sommettono al talento.
E come li stornei ne portan I’ali
nel freddo tempo, a schiera larga e piena,
cosi quel fiato li spiriti mali
di qua, di 1a, di git, di st li mena;

nulla speranza li conforta mai,
non che di posa, ma di minor pena.
4¢

E come i gru van cantando lor lai,
faccendo in aere di sé lunga riga,
cosi vid’ io venir, traendo guai,

49

52

2)5

58

61

ombre portate da la detta briga;
per ch’i’ dissi: “Maestro, chi son quelle
genti che l’aura nera si gastiga?”’
“La prima di color di cui novelle
tu vuo’ saper,” mi disse quelli allotta,
“fu imperadrice di molte favelle.
A vizio di lussuria fu si rotta
che libito fé licito in sua legge,
per torre il biasmo in che era condotta.
Ell’ é Semiramis, di cui si legge
che succedette a Nino e fu sua sposa:
tenne la terra che ’] Soldan corregge.
L’altra é colei che s’ancise amorosa,

e ruppe fede al cener di Sicheo;
64

poi é Cleopatras lussuriosa.
Elena vedi, per cui tanto reo

tempo si volse, e vedi ’] grande Achille,
che con Amore al fine combatteo.
67

Vedi Paris, Tristano”; e pit di mille
ombre mostrommi e nominommi a dito,

ch’Amor di nostra vita dipartille.
88

Canto 5

31

The infernal whirlwind, which never rests, drives

34

the spirits before its violence; turning and striking, it
tortures them.
When they come before the landslide, there the
shrieks, the wailing, the lamenting; there they curse
God’s power.

37

40

43

46

49

52

55

I understood that to this torment were damned
the carnal sinners, who subject their reason to their
lust.
And as their wings carry off the starlings in the
cold season, in large full flocks, so does that breath
carry the evil spirits
here, there, down, up; no hope ever comforts them,

not of lessened suffering, much less of rest.
And as the cranes go singing their lays, making a
long line of themselves in the air, so I saw coming
toward us, uttering cries,
shades borne by the aforesaid violence; so I said:
“Master, who are those people whom the black wind
so chastises?”’
“The first of those about whom you wish to learn,”
he said to me then, “was empress over many
languages.
So broken was she to the vice of lust that in her
laws she made licit whatever pleased, to lift from
herself the blame she had incurred.

58

She is Semiramis, of whom we read that she

61

succeeded Ninus and was his wife: she ruled the
lands the Sultan governs now.
The next is she who killed herself for love and
broke faith with the ashes of Sichaeus; next is lustful

Cleopatra.
64

Behold Helen, who brought such evil times, and

see the great Achilles, who battled against Love at
the end.
67

Behold Paris, Tristan”; and more than a thousand
shades he showed me, and named them, pointing,

whom Love parted from our life.

89

Inferno

70

Poscia ch’io ebbi ’] mio dottore udito
nomar le donne antiche e ’ cavalieri,

pieta mi giunse, e fui quasi smarrito.
73

76

79

I’ cominciai: “Poeta, volontieri

parlerei a quei due che ’nsieme vanno
e paion si al vento esser leggeri.”
Ed elli a me: “Vedrai quando saranno
piu presso a noi; e tu allor li priega
per quello amor che i mena, ed ei verranno.”
Si tosto come il vento a noi li piega,
mossi la voce: “O anime affannate,

82

venite a noi parlar, s’altri nol niega!”
Quali colombe dal disio chiamate
con l’ali alzate e ferme al dolce nido
vegnon per l’aere, dal voler portate,

85

cotali uscir de la schiera ov’ é Dido,

88

a noi venendo per I’aere maligno,
si forte fu l’affettiioso grido.
“O animal grazioso e benigno
che visitando vai per l’aere perso
noi che tignemmo il mondo di sanguigno,

91

94

se fosse amico il re de l’universo,

noi pregheremmo lui de la tua pace,
poi c’hai pieta del nostro mal perverso.
Di quel che udire e che parlar vi piace,
noi udiremo e parleremo a voi,
mentre che ’] vento, come fa, ci tace.

97

100

Siede la terra dove nata fui
su la marina dove ’] Po discende
per aver pace co’ seguaci sui.
Amor, ch’al cor gentil ratto s’apprende,
prese costui de la bella persona
che mi fu tolta, e ’1 modo ancor m/’offende.

103

Amor, ch’a nullo amato amar perdona,
mi prese del costui piacer si forte
che, come vedi, ancor non m’abbandona.

106

Amor condusse noi ad una morte.
Caina attende chi a vita ci spense.”

Queste parole da lor ci fuor porte.
90

Canto 5

70

73

76

is

After I had heard my teacher name the ancient
ladies and knights, pity came upon me, and I was
almost lost.
I began: “Poet, gladly would I speak with those
two who go together and seem to be so light upon
the wind.”
And he to me: “You will see when they are closer
to us; and then beg them by the love that drives
them, and they will come.”
As soon as the wind bends them toward us, I sent

forth my voice: “O wearied souls, come speak with
us, if another does not forbid it!”
82

85

88

As doves, called by their desire, with wings raised
and steady come to their sweet nest through the air,
borne by their will,
so did they emerge from the flock where Dido is,
coming to us through the cruel air, so compelling
was my deepfelt cry.
“O gracious and benign living creature who
through the black air go visiting us who stained the
world blood-red,

91

94

97

100

103

106

if the king of the universe were friendly we would
pray to him for your peace, since you have pity on
our twisted pain.
Of whatever it pleases you to hear and to speak
we will listen and speak to you, while the wind is
quiet for us, as it is now.
The city where I was born sits beside the
shore where the Po descends to have peace with its
followers.
Love, which is swiftly kindled in the noble heart,

seized this one for the lovely person that was taken
from me; and the manner still injures me.
Love, which pardons no one loved from loving in
return, seized me for his beauty so strongly that, as
you see, it still does not abandon me.
Love led us on to one death. Caina awaits him

who extinguished our life.” These words were borne
from them to us.
91

Inferno |
109

Quand’ io intesi quell’ anime offense,
china’ il viso, e tanto il tenni basso

fin che ‘] poeta mi disse: “Che pense?”
iy

115

Quando rispuosi, cominciai: “Oh lasso,

quanti dolci pensier, quanto disio
meno costoro al doloroso passo!”
Poi mi rivolsi a loro e parla’ io,
e cominciai: “Francesca, i tuoi martiri

118

121

a lagrimar mi fanno tristo e pio.
Ma dimmi: al tempo d’i dolci sospiri,
a che e come concedette Amore
che conosceste i dubbiosi disiri?”
E quella a me: “Nessun maggior dolore
che ricordarsi del tempo felice
ne la miseria; e cid sa ’] tuo dottore.

124

Ma s’a conoscer la prima radice
del nostro amor tu hai cotanto affetto,

127,

130

dird come colui che piange e dice.
Noi leggiavamo un giorno per diletto
di Lancialotto come amor lo strinse;
soli eravamo e sanza alcun sospetto.
Per piu fiate li occhi ci sospinse
quella lettura, e scolorocci il viso;

133

ma solo un punto fu quel che ci vinse.
Quando leggemmo il disiato riso
esser basciato da cotanto amante,
questi, che mai da me non fia diviso,

136

159

la bocca mi bascio tutto tremante.
Galeotto fu ’] libro e chi lo scrisse:
quel giorno piu non vi leggemmo avante.”
Mentre che l’uno spirto questo disse,
l’altro piangéa si che di pietade
10 venni men cosi com’ io morisse,

142

e caddi come corpo morto cade.

92

Canto 5

109

112

115

When I understood those injured souls, I bent my
face downward, and I held it down so long that the
poet said: “What are you pondering?”
When I replied, I began: “Alas, how many sweet
thoughts, how much yearning led them to the
grievous pass!”
Then I turned back to them and spoke, and I began:
“Francesca, your sufferings make me sad and piteous to
tears.

118

121

124

127

But tell me: in the time of your sweet sighs, by
what and how did Love grant you to know your
dangerous desires?”
And she to me: “There is no greater pain than to
remember the happy time in wretchedness; and this
your teacher knows.
But if you have so much desire to know the first
root of our love, I will do as one who weeps and
speaks.
We were reading one day, for pleasure, of
Lancelot, how Love beset him; we were alone and

130

133

136

139

142

without any suspicion.
Many times that reading drove our eyes
together and turned our faces pale; but one point
alone was the one that overpowered us.
When we read that the yearned-for smile was
kissed by so great a lover, he, who will never be
separated from me,
kissed my mouth all trembling. Galeotto was the
book and he who wrote it: that day we read there no
further.”
While one spirit said this, the other was weeping
so that for pity I fainted as if I were dying,
and I fell as a dead body falls.

as
93

N@ EES

1-3. Thus... shriek: Limbo is thus identified as the uppermost circle of Hell,
although in important respects it is different from all the others. The narrower
compass of this second circle is the first indication that Hell is funnel-shaped and
that effects of compression and crowding will become increasingly prominent.
4. There stands Minos: According to Greco-Roman

tradition, Minos, son

of Zeus and Europa and king of Crete, and his brother Rhadamanthus became
judges in the underworld (cf. Aen. 6.566—69). Further references to Cretan legend are found in Inferno 12 (the Minotaur, Theseus, and Ariadne) and 14 (the
Old Man of Crete), Purgatorio 26 (Pasiphaé), and Paradiso 13 (Ariadne) (see the
note to 12.12).

6-12. by how he wraps ... wills the soul to be sent down: In other
words, the number of times Minos’s tail is wrapped about his body indicates the
number of circles the soul must descend to find its permanent place. This representation of the overall structure of Hell associates its successively lower levels
with the body. (Michelangelo includes a striking Dantean Minos in his Sistine
Chapel Last Judgment.)
16. hospice: The use of the term for a monastic guesthouse is bitterly sarcastic.
20. spacious entrance: See Matt. 7.13: “wide is the gate and broad is the way
that leadeth unto destruction.”

23. this is willed where . .. can be done: The second of Virgil’s reproofs
of infernal custodians, identical with the first (3.95—96).
25. Now the grief-stricken notes: This first region of Hell proper (but second circle) is marked by the onset of the discordant “music” of Hell, the accu-

mulated dissonances of its grieving souls.
28. all light is silent: That is, where all knowledge ceases (cf. 1.60).

31-33. The infernal whirlwind . . . tortures them: Like many of the punishments in Dante’s Hell, the whirlwind is a taking literally of acommon
metaphor, in this case a figure for the power ofpassion; note the implication
of conflicting impulses in line 30. For the theory ofcontrapasso, see the note to
28.142.
34. before the landslide: For this detail, see 12.32 (another canto involving

conspicuous references to myths about Crete).

94

Notes to Canto 5

39. who subject their reason to their lust: Note the political metaphors:
the sovereign function of reason is usurped by desire. Talento [talent], Dante’s
word for “desire” here, originally referred to the unit of weight of silver used in
antiquity; see the parable of the talents in Matt. 25.14—30. One’s desire is thus
one’s “weight,” one’s dominant inclination (see Augustine, Confessions 13.9.10).
The metaphor is maintained throughout the canto. Lust (Latin Iuxuria) was traditionally regarded as the least serious of the seven deadly vices.
40-44. And as their wings ... down, up: The first of three bird similes
(starlings, cranes, and doves) that track the pilgrim’s shifts of attention; starlings

and doves were associated in the medieval bestiaries with lust (Ryan 1976).
43. here, there, down, up: These directions correspond to the four classical

“perturbations” of the spirit (love, hate, fear, and joy) (see the note to 10.58 and
cf. Cicero, Tusculan Disputations 5.6).
46. as the cranes ... their lays: Bestiaries familiar to Dante (e.g., the one
included in his teacher Brunetto Latini’s Trésor) compare the formations of
migrating cranes to knights in battle lines (Ryan 1976). The emergence of the
line of noble lovers (and there is a reference to the medieval vogue of stories of
adulterous love in Breton /ais) suggests that the starlings may represent more plebeian lovers.
54. empress over many languages: Semiramis, widow of King Ninus, leg-

endary founder of Babylon and its empire, hence “over many languages.” “She
made licit whatever pleased” (in the Italian, only a single letter distinguishes libito
from licito, the “pleasing” from the “lawful”), that is, she legalized incest, allegedly because she herself was guilty of it with her son. For these details and for his
general knowledge of Semiramis, Dante follows hostile Christian accounts
(Augustine’s City ofGod, Orosius’s Seven Books against the Pagans, and Brunetto’s
Trésor).

60. the lands the Sultan governs now: In Dante’s day, Syria, though not
Baghdad, was ruled by the Mameluke Sultans of Egypt.
61-62. she who killed herself for love: An echo of Aen. 4.552: Dido committed suicide when abandoned by Aeneas (see also 6.450—51); she had previously vowed to be faithful to the memory of her husband Sichaeus. Dante could
have known from Macrobius that according to ancient tradition Aeneas and Dido
lived several hundred years apart and that Dido was legendary for her chastity.
Dido’s story had both charmed and alarmed Christian moralists since at least the
time of Augustine (cf. Confessions 1.13).

63. lustful Cleopatra: Queen of Egypt, famous for her liaison with Julius Caesar
and her marriage with Mark Antony, which led to war between him and

2s}

Inferno

Octavian (later Augustus). As was the custom of the Ptolemies, Cleopatra
morganatically married her brother; the theme of incest was introduced with
Semiramis.

64. Behold Helen: Helen of Troy, wife of Menelaus, king of Sparta, blamed
by Homer and Vergil for the Trojan War (cf: Aen. 2.567— 88; the Roman de Troie
28426-33, etc.).

65-66. great Achilles: Dante conserves the classical epithet (cf. Statius, Achilleid
1.1, “magnanimum” [great-souled]), but the Achilles who fell in love with
Polyxena, daughter of Priam, and was thus led to ambush and death was in the
foreground in the Middle Ages, thanks to both Latin (Dictys Cretensis, Dares
Phrygius) and vernacular (Roman de Troie) versions of the story.
67. Paris, Tristan: Paris, the son of the Trojan king Priam and Helen’s abductor,

and a single figure from medieval romance—the final position is telling—round
out the list of love’s victims (seven in number, only the last three are men).
Tristan’s love affair with Iseult, the wife of his uncle, King Mark, ending with
the death of the lovers, was the most famous love story of the Middle Ages. All
seven examples involve the subversion of political or military responsibility by
adulterous passion.
69. whom Love parted from our life: See Aen. 6.442: “quos durus amor
crudeli tabe peredit” [those whom harsh love destroyed with cruel death]; the
Sybil is identifying a division of the underworld by its denizens.

71. ancient ladies and knights: Such anachronistic description of classical
and ancient figures is frequent in Dante’s time.
72. pity came upon me... almost lost: The pilgrim’s strong reaction of
sympathy begins a process that reaches its climax at the end of the canto. His
word for “lost” here, smarrito, was used in 1.3 of the straight way.
82-84. As doves .. . by their will: For the comparison, see Aen. 5.213-17
and 6.190—92, when the doves of Venus guide Aeneas to the golden bough, the

key to entering Hades. This is the last of the bird similes, which move toward
smaller groups and “nobler” birds and from classical to modern examples (Shoaf
[1975] surveys doves in the Comedy).
82-84. called by their desire ... borne by their will: Such phrases continue the principle of the whole canto: the wind that drives the soul is the force
of desire.

88-108. O gracious and benign ... from them to us: Francesca (she is
identified in line 116) begins with a courteous salutation meant to capture the

96

Notes to Canto 5

listener’s attention and good will (the captatio benevolentiae of classical rhetoric),
and the gracious tone is maintained throughout her carefully organized speeches.

90. stained the world blood-red: Francesca is alluding to Ovid’s tale of
Pyramus and Thisbe, residents of Semiramis’s Babylon (see Met. 4.55—-166):
Pyramus’s blood stains the mulberry first red, then, when it dries, black.

93. our twisted pain: The Latin/Italian pervertere means literally “to turn in
an evil direction.”
97-99.

The city .. . with its followers: Francesca was born in Ravenna,

where, during the Middle Ages, one of the branches of the Po entered the
Adriatic. She uses the language of pursuit to describe the relation between
the Po and its tributaries. Her yearning for peace was evident also in lines
91-92.
100-107. Love . . . extinguished our life: Each of these three terzinas begins with the word Love (anaphora): first of Paolo’s love for Francesca (Love
“seized” him), then of her love for him (also a “seizing”—note the contrast

between Francesca’s claim that anyone beloved must love in return and Virgil’s
parallel but quite different statement in Purg. 22.10—12), and last of its result,
death (Love “led” them). In each case it is the personified god of love that is
made the agent, rather than the human actors. Note the etymological figure in
the central terzina, Amor...

amato..

. amar.

Hardt (1973) observed that of the nineteen instances of the word amor, amore
in the Inferno, this canto has the central nine (i.e., five precede Canto 5, five
follow it), of which these are the central! three.

100. Love, which is swiftly kindled: Francesca echoes the canzone “Al cor
gentil rempaira sempre amore” [To the noble heart love always repairs], by the
Bolognese poet Guido Guinizelli (d. 1276?), whom Dante admired and called
“the sage” (when quoting the same canzone in Vita nuova 20) and “my father”
(Purg. 26.97); he is one of the founders of the “sweet new style” (dolce stil novo)

proclaimed by Bonagiunta of Lucca in Purg. 24.57. For Francesca’s words, see
especially “Al cor gentil,” line 11, “Foco d’amor in gentil cor s’aprende/come
vertute in petra preziosa” [The fire of love is kindled in the noble heart /as is the
power in a precious stone]. Francesca’s speech is a tissue of allusions to the
fashionable poetry of love, including Dante’s own early poems.
106.

Love

led us on to one

death: In the Italian the first word, amor, is

included in the last two: una_morte.

107. Caina awaits him: “Caina” is the division of Cocytus—the lowest circle
of Hell—assigned to those who murder relatives, named for Cain (Caino).

oF,

Inferno

111. What are you pondering: The translation emphasizes the etymological
force of Italian pensare [to think], from Latin pensum [a weight of flax to be spun],
continuing the series of metaphors of weight. Compare the movements of the
pilgrim’s head in these lines with those ascribed to the lovers later.
113. sweet thoughts: The expression is almost a technical term in the medieval theory of love deriving from Andreas Capellanus and refers to the obsessive
presence of the beloved’s image in the imagination.

116. Francesca: Only here is the identity of this soul revealed; the pilgrim has
either recognized her or inferred her identity from her words. It is Francesca da
Rimini (her companion, Paolo Malatesta, remains silent), a member of the Polenta

family, who ruled Ravenna (her nephew, Guido Novello da Polenta [c. 1270—
1333], would be Dante’s host in Ravenna at the end of his life); she was married around 1275 to Gianciotto [Lame John] Malatesta, second son of the ruler
of Rimini (see 27.6—48 and 28.76—90, with notes). According to Dante’s early
commentators (the events left no trace in the chronicles), around 1285 Francesca’s

husband discovered her with his younger brother Paolo and murdered them
both. Baccaccio, tireless in seeking out informants about Dante, spent extended

periods in Ravenna in the 1340s and ’50s and dedicated an eclogue to Guido
Novello’s successor; in his Esposizio ni he gives a lengthy, melodramatic account
of the affair which, though unconfirmed by other sources, may have some
basis in fact. Among other things, he asserts that Francesca had fallen in love

with Paolo, his brother’s proxy at the betrothal, mistaking him for her intended
husband.
119. how did Love: The pilgrim follows Francesca’s rhetoric of attributing
agency to “Love” rather than to the human actors.

121. no greater pain: If Francesca is taken at her word, Dante’s visit would
involve considerable intensification of her suffering. Despite the apparent nod
to Virgil here (“and this your teacher knows’’), the commentators cite Boethius,

Consolation 2.4.3-6. The idea is a commonplace, however (cf. Augustine, Confessions 10.14), like its converse, the pleasure of recalling past misery once free of
it (e.g., Aen. 1.203: “perhaps at some time we will be glad remembering these
things’’) (see the notes to 6.96 and 10.34).

124. But if you have so much desire: Compare the beginning of Aeneas’s
tale of the fall of Troy (Aen. 2.10). Again, Francesca draws on lofty literary models.
127. We were reading: Paolo and Francesca were reading some version of
the Book of Lancelot of the Lake, part of a vast early-thirteenth-century prose compilation, the so-called Vulgate Cycle, and specifically the scene where Lancelot,
coaxed by his friend and go-between Galehault, confesses his love to Guinevere
and the lovers exchange their first kiss (the scene was often illustrated).

98

Notes to Canto 5

130. Many times: Like volta (turning, from volgere], fiata [occasion|—from
Old French fiee (or directly from VL *vicata, according to DeVoto & Oli, crossed
with fiato, breath)—was for Dante a normal word for “occasion.”” Whatever the
derivation, Dante often seems to associate fiata with fiato; here the association

contributes strongly to the tension; cf. 10.48.

130-31. that reading . . . turned our faces pale: The reading is now made
the active agent; note the emphasis on the motions of the head. And see Ovid’s
Art of Love 1.573-74.
132. one point alone . . . overpowered us: See the use ofthe term punto in
1.11, 7.32; again, the rhetoric places the agency in something other than the
human beings.

133. the yearned-for smile was kissed: The use of the passive again avoids
naming the agent. In the surviving Old French Lancelot romances, it is invariably Guinevere who kisses Lancelot, not vice versa; so also in the iconographic
tradition. For another reference to this scene, see Par. 16.14-15 (the “first

recorded fault of Guinevere”).

135. who will never be separated from me: This line is quoted in one of
the six ballate by Guido Novello da Polenta (see note to line 116).
137.

Galeotto

was

the book:

Galeotto is the Italian form of Galehault, the

name of the knight who, as Lancelot’s friend, arranged the meeting with
Guinevere (see the note to line 127). Because of the prominence in it of this
character, the second third of the Book of Lancelot of the Lake was commonly called
the Galehault. As Francesca’s remark shows, the name had by Dante’s time already
become current in Italian as a common noun for “go-between”; compare the
English word pander, originally the name of the character in Chaucer’s Troilus
and Criseyde.

138. that day we read there no further: If they had finished reading the
Vulgate Cycle, they would have read how Lancelot’s and Guinevere’s adultery
(with Arthur’s incest) eventually destroys the entire Arthurian world (the blows
by which Arthur and his son Mordred kill each other are recalled in 32.61—62),

though the lovers themselves repent and die saintly deaths.
141-42. for pity I fainted .. . falls: Given the emphasis on the motions of
the head throughout the canto, it seems likely that the pilgrim falls head first (cf.
6.92-93). The pilgrim’s pity, which will frequently figure in the rest of Hell, is
presented as highly questionable. His symbolic death imitates Francesca’s (deathbringing) surrender to passion, just as she and Paolo had imitated the book; like
her surrender, it is a response to a text. At the end of Canto 3, the pilgrim had
fallen “like one whom sleep is taking.”

99

CANTO

6

Al tornar de la mente, che si chiuse

dinanzi a la pieta d’i due cognati,
che di trestizia tutto mi confuse,

novi tormenti e novi tormentati
mi veggio intorno come ch’io mi mova
ch’io mi volga, e come che io guati.
Io sono al terzo cerchio, de la piova
etterna, maladetta, fredda e greve;
10

13

16

19

regola e qualita mai non |’é nova.
Grandine grossa, acqua tinta e neve
per l’aere tenebroso si riversa;
pute la terra che questo riceve.
Cerbero, fiera crudele e diversa,

con tre gole caninamente latra
sovra la gente che quivi ¢ sommersa.
Li occhi ha vermigli, la barba unta e atra
e ’] ventre largo, e unghiate le mani;
graffia li spirti ed iscoia ed isquatra.
Urlar li fa la pioggia come cani;
de l’un de’ lati fanno a l’altro schermo;

volgonsi spesso i miseri profani.
22

2

28

Quando ci scorse Cerbero, il gran vermo,

le bocche aperse e mostrocci le sanne;
non avea membro che tenesse fermo.
E ’] duca mio distese le sue spanne,
prese la terra, e con piene le pugna
la gitto dentro a le bramose canne.
Qual é quel cane ch’abbaiando agogna
e€ si racqueta poi che ’] pasto morde,
ché solo a divorarlo intende e pugna,
100

CANTO

6

Third circle: the gluttons—Cerberus—the Florentine Ciacco—civil
strife in Florence: causes, prophecy—famous Florentines in Hell—
intensity of sufferings after the Last Judgment

When consciousness returned, after closing itself
up before the pity of the two in-laws, which utterly
confounded me with sadness,

new torments and new tormented ones I see
around me wherever I walk, and wherever I turn, and

wherever I look.
I am in the third circle, with the eternal, cursed,

10

13

16

i)

cold, and heavy rain; its rule and quality never
change.
Great hailstones, filthy water, and snow pour
down through the dark air; the earth stinks that
receives them.
Cerberus, cruel, monstrous beast, with three

throats barks doglike over the people submerged
there.
His eyes are red, his beard greasy and black, his
belly large, and his hands have talons; he claws the
spirits, flays and quarters them.
The rain makes them howl like dogs; they make a
shield for one of their sides with the other; castout

22

25

28

wretches, they turn over frequently.
When Cerberus, the great worm, caught sight of
us, he opened his mouths and showed his fangs; not
one of his members held still.
And my leader opened his hands, took up earth,
and with both fists full threw it into those ravenous
pipes.
Like a dog that baying hungers and is silent once
he bites his food, for he looks and struggles only to
devour it,

101

Inferno

31

cotai si fecer quelle facce lorde
de lo demonio Cerbero, che ’ntrona

34

oy,

l’anime si ch’esser vorrebber sorde.
Noi passavam su per l’ombre che adona
la greve pioggia, e ponavam le piante
sovra lor vanita che par persona.
Elle giacean per terra tutte quante,
fuor d’una ch’a seder si levo, ratto

40

ch’ella ci vide passarsi davante.
“O tu che se’ per questo ’nferno tratto,’
mi disse, “riconoscimi, se sai:

tu fosti, prima ch’io disfatto, fatto.”
43

E io a lui: “L’angoscia che tu hai
forse ti tira for de la mia mente,

46

49

si che non par ch’i’ ti vedessi mai.
Ma dimmi chi tu se’ che ’n si dolente
loco se’ messo e hai si fatta pena
che, s’altra € maggio, nulla é si spiacente.”
Ed elli a me: “La tua citta, ch’é piena
d’invidia si che gia trabocca il sacco,
seco mi tenne in la vita serena.

52

Voi cittadini mi chiamaste Ciacco;

per la dannosa colpa de la gola,
come tu vedi, a la pioggia mi fiacco.
2)

58

E io anima trista non son sola,

ché tutte queste a simil pena stanno
per simil colpa.” E piu non fé parola.
Io li rispuosi: “Ciacco, il tuo affanno
mi pesa si ch’a lagrimar mi ’nvita;
ma dimmi, se tu sai, a che verranno

61

64

67

li cittadin de la citta partita;
s’alcun v’é giusto; e dimmi la cagione
per che I’ha tanta discordia assalita.”
E quelli a me: “Dopo lunga tencione
verranno al sangue, e la parte selvaggia
caccera l’altra con molta offensione.
Poi appresso convien che questa caggia
infra tre soli, e che |’altra sormonti

con la forza di tal che testé piaggia.
102

>

Canto 6

31

34

37

so became those filthy snouts of the demon
Cerberus, who thunders over the souls so that they
wish they were deaf.
We were passing through the shades that the
heavy rain weighs down, and we were placing our
soles on their emptiness that seems a human body.
They were lying on the ground, all of them, save
one, who raised himself to sit as soon as he saw us

40

43

46

49

BZ

passing before him.
“O you who are led through this Hell,” he said to
me, “recognize me if you can: you were made before
I was unmade.”
And I to him: “The anguish that you have perhaps
drives you from my memory, so that it does not
seem I have ever seen you.
But tell me who you are, who are put here in so
painful a place, and have such a punishment that if any
is greater, none is so disgusting.”
And he to me: “Your city, which is so full of envy
that the sack already overflows, kept me with her
during my sunny life.
You citizens called me Ciacco; because of the
damnable sin of the gullet, as you see, I am broken

by the rain.
55

And I, wretched soul, am not alone, for all these

58

endure similar punishment for similar guilt.” And he
spoke no further word.
I replied: “Ciacco, your trouble weighs on me so
that it calls me to weep; but tell me, if you know, to

61

what will come
the citizens of the divided city; if any there is just;
and tell me the reason so much discord has assailed

its
64

67

And he to me: “After much quarreling they will come
to blood, and the party from the woods will drive
out the other with much harm.
Then later this party must fall within three suns
and the other rise, with the power of one who now

hugs the shore.
103

Inferno

70

73

Alte terra lungo tempo le fronti,
tenendo I’altra sotto gravi pesi,
come che di cid pianga o che n’aonti.
Giusti son due, e non vi sono intesi;

superbia, invidia e avarizia sono
76

79

le tre faville c’hanno i cuori accesi.”
Qui puose fine al lagrimabil suono.
E io a lui: “Ancor vo’ che mi ’nsegni
e che di piu parlar mi facci dono.
Farinata e ’] Tegghiaio, che fuor si degni,
Iacopo Rusticucci, Arrigo e ’] Mosca,

e li altri ch’a ben far puoser li ’ngegni,
82

85

88

dimmi ove sono e fa ch’io li conosca;

ché gran disio mi stringe di savere
se ’] ciel li addolcia 0 lo ’nferno li attosca.”
E quelli: “Ei son tra l’anime pit nere;
diverse colpe giu li grava al fondo:
se tanto scendi, la i potrai vedere.
Ma quando tu sarai nel dolce mondo,
priegoti ch’a la mente altrui mi rechi:
pit. non ti dico e pit non ti rispondo.”

91

Li diritti occhi torse allora in biechi;

94

guardommi un poco e poi chino la testa:
cadde con essa a par de li altri ciechi.
E ’] duca disse a me: “Pit non si desta
di qua dal suon de l’angelica tromba,
quando verra la nimica podesta:

97

100

103

ciascun rivedera la trista tomba,

ripigliera sua carne e sua figura,
udira quel ch’in etterno rimbomba.”
Si trapassammo per sozza mistura
de l’ombre e de la pioggia, a passi lenti,
toccando un poco la vita futura;
per ch’io dissi: “Maestro, esti tormenti
crescerann’ ei dopo la gran sentenza,
o fier minori, 0 saran si cocenti?”

106

Ed elli a me: “Ritorna a tua scienza,

che vuol, quanto la cosa é piu perfetta,

piu senta il bene, e cosi la doglienza.
104

Canto 6

70

73

76

79

82

85

88

91

Long will they hold high their brows, keeping the
others down under heavy weights, no matter how
they weep or are shamed.
Two are just, and no one heeds them; pride, envy,

and greed are the three sparks that have set hearts
ablaze.”
Here he put an end to the tearful sound. And I to
him: “Again I wish you to instruct me and make me the
gift of further speech.
Farinata and Tegghiaio, who were so worthy,
Iacopo Rusticucci, Arrigo and Mosca, and the others
who turned their wits to doing well,
tell me where they are and cause me to know them;
for great desire urges me to understand if Heaven
sweetens or Hell poisons them.”
And he: “They are among the blacker souls;
various sins weigh them toward the bottom: if you
descend so far, you can see them there.
But when you are back in the sweet world, I beg
you, bring me to people’s minds: no more do I say
to you and no more do I answer you.”
His direct eyes then he twisted into oblique ones;
he stared at me a little and then bent his head; with

94

97

100

it he fell level with the other blind ones.
And my leader said to me: “Never again will he
arise this side of the angelic trumpet, when he will
see the enemy governor:
each will see again his sad tomb, will take again
his flesh and his shape, will hear what resounds
eternally.”
Thus we passed through a filthy mixture of
shades and rain, with slow steps, touching somewhat
on the future life;

103

106

so I said: “Master, these torments, will they grow
after the great Judgment, or will they be less, or
equally hot?”
And he to me: “Return to your philosophy, which
teaches that the more perfect a thing is, the more it
feels what is good, and the same for pain.
105

Inferno

109

Ua

NN)

Tutto che questa gente maladetta
in vera perfezion gia mai non vada,
di la piu che di qua essere aspetta.”
Noi aggirammo a tondo quella strada,
parlando piu assai ch’i’ non ridico;
venimmo al punto dove si digrada.
Quivi trovammo Pluto, il gran nemico.

106

Canto 6

109

Even though these cursed people will never enter
into true perfection, on that side they can expect to
have more being than on this.”

112

We followed that path in a curve, speaking much

115

more than I recount; we came to the point where it
descends.
There we found Plutus, the great enemy.

sc

107

NOTES
2. the pity of the two in-laws: Paolo and Francesca were brother- and sisterin-law, a degree of relation that in the eyes of the Church would have made
their relationship incestuous as well as adulterous.
7-12.

I am in the third circle . . . the earth stinks: The rain, hail, and snow

and resulting mud are versions of the food and drink to which the gluttons were
addicted: in the last analysis merely versions of the elements earth and water. Dog
imagery dominates (lines 14, 19, and 28), but the gluttons wallow like pigs (as in
line 52; cf. 8.49) in material implicitly compared to excrement (line 12). Chiavacci
Leonardi notes a parallel in Wisdom 16.16, where the wicked are said to be punished by “strange waters, and hail, and rain.” Gluttony is the second of the seven

deadly vices or sins; on their traditional ranking, see Purg. 17.115—39, with notes;
for their relation to the arrangement of Hell, see the note to 11.70—73.
9. its rule and quality never change: The rule is the quantity and direction,
the quality is the nature, of what is coming down.
13-32. Cerberus . . . thunders: The three-headed dog, in Greek mythology
the guardian of the entrance to Hades. Dante is drawing on Vergil’s description,
Aen. 6.417—22:

Cerberus haec ingens latratu regna trifauci
personat adverso recubans immanis in antro.
Cui vates horrere videns iam colla colubris
melle soporatam et medicatis frugibus offam
obicit. [lle fame rabida tria guttura pandens
corripit obiectam, atque immania terga resolvit
fusus humi totoque ingens extenditur antro.

[These regions gigantic Cerberus with his three-throated barking
makes resound, lying huge across the path in his den.
When the priestess saw the snakes already beginning to rise around his neck,
she threw him a cake drugged with honey and soporific grain.
He in his raging hunger opened his three gullets,
and seized it as it was thrown, and relaxed his enormous bulk,

lying on the ground; enormous, he fills the whole cave.]
The traditional classical interpretation of Cerberus saw him as the earth, devourer

of corpses (Servius). Dante makes him into a personification of gluttony and a
demon

(line 32—a minor devil, like Charon), debasing him and scaling h'.n

down, aptly turning the three throats to the account of gluttony and adding other
quasi-human details (the greasy beard, large belly, hands) appropriate to it.

108

Notes to Canto 6

Cerberus’s thundering over the souls (line 32) and his mauling of them (line 18)
have a quasi-political dimension (see the note to lines 91—93).
14, 16, 18. latra [barks] ... atra [black] ... isquatra [quarters]: The
same three rhymes appear in the last of the rime petrose, “Cosi nel mio parlar-voglio
esser aspro”’ (lines 54, 55, and 56), discussed in Durling and Martinez 1990.

20-21. they make a shield. . . turn over frequently: An important parallel
exists between this description and the characterization of Florence as a sick
woman in Purg. 6.148-51.
21. castout wretches: Dante’s term is profani [profane], etymologically referring to those barred from the fanum, or sanctuary. As Gmelin observes, the sinners here are like drunkards lying in the gutter.
22. the great worm: That Cerberus is a worm is appropriate to the gastronomic theme, but there is also an association with Satan himself, called the “evil

worm that gnaws the world” in 34.108 (see also 6.115, “the great enemy”).
36. their emptiness that seems a human body: “Human body” translates
Dante’s persona [person]; compare Francesca’s use of the term in 5.101. In addition
to the vivid visual effect here, the line isa comment on gluttony itself, like line 101.
40-42. O you. . . Iwas unmade: Note the etymological figure in fatto /disfatto
[made/unmade]. The line can be taken to mean that Ciacco recognizes the pilgrim; his phrase “if you can” would then refer to his disfigurement. Of course,
as Dante’s readers knew, and as becomes clear in Canto 16, a Florentine of the

upper class was recognizable by his clothes, and the pilgrim’s age is obvious.
49-51. Your city . . . kept me: Note the implicitly digestive image of the sack.
Ciacco is the first Florentine the pilgrim encounters; these lines introduce the
important theme of Florentine political affairs and Dante’s involvement in them.

50. envy: Compare 1.111, where the devil’s envy is made responsible for the
she-wolf’s presence in the world.
52. You citizens called me Ciacco: Note the repeated emphasis on the theme
of the city; cittadino, used here and in line 61, means “city dweller.” Ciacco is
otherwise unknown; the name may be a corruption of French Jacques or even of
Cecco, the nickname for Francesco; it also means “hog.”

53. the damnable sin of the gullet: Italian gola [throat]; from gula, the standard medieval Latin term for gluttony.

58-59. your trouble ... calls me to weep: Note the parallel with the
pilgrim’s words to Francesca (5.116—17), whom the pilgrim also may have recognized (see the note to lines 36—42).

109

Inferno
v

60-63. but tell me ... has assailed it: The pilgrim asks three questions,
which are answered in order in lines 64—72, 73, and 74-75, respectively.

61. the divided city: The term refers directly to the division of Florence into
parties and the dominant role played by violent partisanship, but it also resonates with the Augustinian concept of the two cities (the Earthly and the Heavenly), which coexist in this life (City of God, Book 11).
64-72. After much quarreling ... they weep or are shamed: Ciacco
foretells the events of 1300 to 1302. The rival Guelf factions, the Whites (“the
party from the woods,” to which Dante belonged, so called because its nucleus,
the Cerchi family, was originally from a rural area outside Florence) and the Blacks
(“the other,” led by Corso Donati), rioted violently on May 1, 1300. In June
(while Dante was one of the six priors of the city, the chief executive committee), during the temporary dominance of the White party, the troublemakers
from both parties were exiled, including Dante’s close friend and fellow poet
Guido Cavalcanti, a turbulent member of the White faction; in June 1301, all

the Black leaders were exiled.
“One who now hugs the shore” refers to Pope Boniface VIII, who for a long
time seemed impartial, though he secretly favored the Black faction. In 1301 both
sides appealed to him to make peace; he sent Charles of Valois, a brother of the
French king, as peacemaker; Charles, after gaining entrance to the city with an armed
force, supported the Blacks in their violence against the Whites, many of whom
were killed, others fleeing into exile (early November 1301). The Black victory,
begun in the spring of 1302, was complete by the fall, thus “within three suns [years]”’
from the spring of 1300; they dominated Florence during the rest of Dante’s lifetime. For the effect of these events on Dante’s life, see 10.79—81 and notes.

65. to blood: That is, to shedding blood. Note the repetition of verranno [they
will come] from line 60.
73. Two are just: Who Ciacco/Dante means is never specified (15.61—66
supports the view that Ciacco refers to Dante as one of the two). The existence
in corrupt cities of a small number of “just men” is a biblical motif, as in Gen.

18.23—33 and Ezek. 14.13—-14.
74. pride, envy, and greed: Note the similar line, again with invidia [envy]
at the center, at 15.68. There would seem to be an important relation with the
three beasts of Canto 1.

79-80. Farinata .. . Mosca: All are prominent Florentines of earlier generations. For Farinata degli Uberti, see Canto 10; for Iacopo Rusticucci and
Tegghiaio Aldobrandi, see Canto 16; for Mosca, see Canto 28.103—-11; Arrigo,

presumably Arrigo di Cascia, is not mentioned again.

84. if Heaven sweetens or Hell poisons: Note the food metaphors.

110

Notes to Canto 6

91-93. His direct eyes . . . the other blind ones: Ciacco has been looking
directly at Dante; now he turns his head away, still looking at Dante, but obliquely,
that is, sidelong; then he bows his head, and the rest of his body follows his head

downward (cf. the movements of Dante’s head in Canto 5). The sidelong gaze
is traditionally characteristic of envy (invidere [to envy] was traditionally derived
from the privative prefix in- and the verb “to see”; note the blindness mentioned
in line 93); compare Ovid’s portrait of Envy in Met. 2.770-82, especially line
776: “nusquam recta acies” [her eyebeam is never straight]. While speaking with
the pilgrim and gazing at him directly, Ciacco was momentarily restored to community; his weird withdrawal may be in part a comment on the disregard of
civic responsibility implicit in gluttony.
96. the enemy governor: The podesta (usually podesta, from Latin potestas, potestatis)
was the chief executive in the medieval Italian city-states, often brought from the
outside, usually for six months or a year. Virgil is referring to the Last Judgment
and Christ’s coming asJudge (once again, as in 4.53-54, without any reference to
his divinity) on the basis of Matthew 24-25, the so-called Little Apocalypse.
99. will hear ... eternally: The damned will hear the definitive sentence
condemning them to Hell for eternity (Matt. 25.41).

106-9. Return to your philosophy . . . pain: “Your philosophy” is equivalent to philosophy as such (cf. the same usage in Hamlet 1.5.167), meaning, of
course, the current Aristotelianism. The axiom Virgil cites appears in Aristotle’s
Nichomachean Ethics 10.4.
109-11.

Even though these cursed people ... than on this: For Plato

and the Neoplatonic tradition, human nature was complete in the soul; the union

with the body was a fall. For Aristotle the soul was the form of the body; he
inclined toward mortalism (the doctrine that the soul dies with the body). Since
the Bible taught that God created Adam’s and Eve’s bodies directly, Christians
could not accept the Platonic view, for the body must be good in its kind. The

medieval adaptation of Aristotle’s doctrine was that the nature of human beings
is the union of the immortal soul with the body (cf. 13.37—39 and notes). Thus

only when body and soul are reunited can human beings be complete, or “perfect” in their natures. The accepted view, therefore, was that the sufferings of

the damned will be more intense after the Resurrection. The effect on the damned
of the ending of time is discussed in 10.58.
115. Plutus: We interpret the Italian Pluto (which appears in the Comedy only
here and in 7.2) as referring to the traditional god of riches, Plutus, rather than
the god of the underworld, Pluto (also called Dis and Hades), whom Dante iden-

tifies with Satan and regularly refers to as Dis or Lucifer. However, Dante was
aware of a special association between the two (of which he had read in Cicero
and Isidore ofSeville), based on gold and silver coming from underground and
on the importance of greed as a source of ills. That Plutus is called “the great
enemy” (cf. “the great worm,” line 22 and note) strengthens the connection.

111

CANTO

7

“Pape Satan, pape Satan aleppe!”
comincio Pluto con la voce chioccia;

10

e quel savio gentil, che tutto seppe,
disse per confortarmi: “Non ti noccia
la tua paura; ché poder ch’elli abbia
non ci torra lo scender questa roccia.”
Poi si rivolse a quella ’nfiata labbia
e disse: “Taci, maladetto lupo!
consuma dentro te con la tua rabbia.
Non é sanza cagion l’andare al cupo:
vuolsi ne l’alto, 1a dove Michele

13

16

19

22

25

fé la vendetta del superbo strupo.”
Quali dal vento le gonfiate vele
caggiono avvolte, poi che |’alber fiacca:
tal cadde a terra la fiera crudele.
Cosi scendemmo ne la quarta lacca,
pigliando piu de la dolente ripa
che ‘] mal de l’universo tutto insacca.
Ahi giustizia di Dio! tante chi stipa
nove travaglie e pene quant’ io viddi?
e perché nostra colpa si ne scipa?
Come fa l’onda 1a sovra Cariddi,

che si frange con quella in cui s’intoppa:
cosi convien che qui la gente riddi.
Qui vid’ 1’ gente pit ch’altrove troppa,
e d’una parte e d’altra, con grand’ urli,

voltando pesi per forza di poppa.
28

Percotéansi ’ncontro; e poscia pur li
si rivolgea ciascun, voltando a retro,

gridando: “Perché tieni?” e “Perché burli?”
112

CANTO

7

Fourth circle: the avaricious and the prodigal—Plutus—Virgil on
Fortune—fifth circle: the angry and sullen—Styx—the tower

“Pape Satan, pape Satan aleppe!”’ began Plutus
with his clucking voice; and that noble sage, who
knew all things,
said, to strengthen me, “Let not your fear harm

10

13

16

19

22

25

28

you; for whatever power he may have shall not
prevent us from going down this cliff.”
Then he turned back to that swollen face and
said: “Silence, cursed wolf! consume yourself with
your rage within.
Not without cause is our descent to the depths: it
is willed on high, where Michael avenged the proud
onslaught.”
As when sails swollen by the wind fall tangled,
when the mast gives way: so did that cruel beast fall
to earth.
So we descended into the fourth pit, taking in
more of the sorrowing bank that bags all the evil of
the universe.
Ah, justice of God! who stuffs in so many strange
travails and punishments as I saw? and why does
our own guilt so destroy us?
As the waves do there above Charybdis, breaking
over each other as they collide: so the people here
must dance their round.
Here I saw people more numerous than before, on
one side and the other, with great cries rolling
weights by the force of their chests.
They would collide, and then nght there each one,
reversing directions, would look back, crying: “Why
do you hold?” and “Why do you toss?”
113

Inferno

3h!

34

Cosi tornavan per lo cerchio tetro
da ogne mano a l’opposito punto,
gridandosi anche loro ontoso metro;
poi si volgea ciascun, quand’ era giunto
per lo suo mezzo cerchio a l’altra giostra.
E io, ch’avea lo cor quasi compunto,

37

dissi: “Maestro mio, or mi dimostra

40

che gente é questa, e se tutti fuor cherci
questi chercuti a la sinistra nostra.”
Ed elli a me: “Tutti quanti fuor guerci
si de la mente in la vita primaia
che con misura nullo spendio ferci.

43

46

49

52

55

58

61

Assai la voce lor chiaro |’abbaia,

quando vegnono a’ due punti del cerchio
dove colpa contraria li dispaia.
Questi fuor cherci, che non han coperchio
piloso al capo, e papi e cardinali,
in cui usa avarizia il suo soperchio.”
E io: “Maestro, tra questi cotali
dovre’ io ben riconoscere alcuni
che furo immondi di cotesti mali.”
Ed elli a me: “Vano pensiero aduni:
la sconoscente vita che 1 fé sozzi
ad ogne conoscenza or li fa bruni.
In etterno verranno a li due cozzi;

questi resurgeranno del sepulcro
col pugno chiuso, e questi coi crin mozzi.
Mal dare e mal tener lo mondo pulcro
ha tolto loro, e posti a questa zuffa:
qual ella sia, parole non ci appulcro.
Or puoi, figliuol, veder la corta buffa
d’i ben che son commessi a la Fortuna,

64

67

per che l’umana gente si rabuffa;
ché tutto l’oro ch’é sotto la luna
e che gia fu, di quest’ anime stanche
non poterebbe farne posare una.”
“Maestro mio,” diss’ io, “or mi di anche:

questa Fortuna di che tu mi tocche,
che é, che i ben del mondo ha si tra branche?”
114

Canto 7

31

Thus they would return around the dark circle on
either hand to the point opposite, again shouting at
each other their shameful meter;

34

then each would turn back, once he had arrived

Si

through his half-circle to the other jousting. And
I, my heart almost pierced through,
said: “Master, now explain to me what people this
is, and if these tonsured ones to our left were all

40

43

46

49

52

55

clerics.”
And he to me: “Every one of them was so crosseyed of mind in the first life, that no measure
governed their spending.
Very clearly do their voices bay it out, when they
come to the two points of the circle where their
opposing faults disjoin them.
These were clerics, who have no hairy covering to
their heads, and popes and cardinals, in whom
avarice does its worst.”
And I: “Master, among this last kind, I should

certainly be able to recognize some who were soiled
with those ills.”
And he to me: “You are gathering empty thought:
the undiscerning life that befouled them makes them
dark now to all recognition.
For eternity they will come to the two buttings:
these will rise from the tomb with closed fists, these

58

61

with hair cut short.
Bad giving and bad keeping has deprived them of
the lovely world and set them to this scuffling:
whatever it is, I prettify no words for it.
Now you can see, my son, the brief mockery of
the goods that are committed to Fortune, for which
the human race so squabbles;

64

67

for all the gold that is under the moon and that
ever was, could not give rest to even one of these
weary souls.”
“My master,” said I, “now tell me also: this
Fortune that you touch on here, what is it, that has

the goods of the world so in its clutches?”
TELS

Inferno

70

fk)

E quelli a me: “Oh creature sciocche,
quanta ignoranza é quella che v’offende!
Or vo’ che tu mia sentenza ne ’mbocche.
Colui lo cui saver tutto trascende
fece li cieli, e dié lor chi conduce

76

79

si ch’ogne parte ad ogne parte splende,
distribuendo igualmente la luce.
Similemente a li splendor mondani
ordino general ministra e duce
che permutasse a tempo li ben vani
di gente in gente e d’uno in altro sangue,
oltre la difension d’i senni umani;

82

per ch’una gente impera e l’altra langue,
seguendo lo giudicio di costei,
che € occulto come in erba l’angue.

85

Vostro saver non ha contasto a lei;

88

questa provede, giudica, e persegue
suo regno come il loro li altri déi.
Le sue permutazion non hanno triegue;
necessita la fa esser veloce,

91

si spesso vien chi vicenda consegue.
Quest’ é colei ch’é tanto posta in croce
pur da color che le dovrien dar lode,
dandole biasmo a torto e mala voce;

94

97

100

103

106

ma ella s’é beata e cid non ode;

con l’altre prime creature lieta
volve sua spera e beata si gode.
Or discendiamo omai a maggior pieta:
gia ogne stella cade che saliva
quand’ io mi mossi, e ’] troppo star si vieta.”
Noi ricidemmo il cerchio a l’altra riva
sovr’ una fonte che bolle e riversa
per un fossato che da lei deriva.
L’acqua era buia assai piu che persa;
€ nol, in compagnia de l’onde bige,
intrammo git per una via diversa.

In la palude va c’ha nome Stige
questo tristo ruscel, quand’é disceso
al pié de le maligne piagge grige.
116

Canto 7

70

We

76

72

82

And he to me: “O foolish creatures, how great is
the ignorance that injures you! Now I would have
you drink in my judgment.
He whose wisdom transcends all things fashioned
the heavens, and he gave them governors who see that
every part shines to every other part,
distributing the light equally. Similarly, for
worldly splendors he ordained a general minister and
leader
who would transfer from time to time the empty
goods from one people to another, from one family
to another, beyond any human wisdom’s power to
prevent;
therefore one people rules and another languishes,
according to her judgment, that is hidden, like the
snake in grass.

85

Your knowledge cannot resist her; she foresees,

88

judges, and carries out her rule as the other gods do
theirs.
Her permutations know no truce; necessity makes
her swift, so thick come those who must have their

turns.
91

94

o7

100

103
106

This is she who is so crucified even by those who
should give her praise, wrongly blaming and
speaking ill of her;
but she is blessed in herself and does not listen:
with the other first creatures, she gladly turns her
sphere and rejoices in her blessedness.
But now let us go down to even greater pity:
already every star is falling that was rising when |
set out, and too long a stay is forbidden.”
We cut across the circle to the other shore, beside

a spring that boils and spills into a ditch leading away
from it.
The water was much darker than purple; and we,
beside the murky wave, entered a strange, descending path.
Into the swamp called Styx goes this sad stream,
when it has come down to the foot of the evil grey
slopes.
117

Inferno

109

E io, che di mirare stava inteso,

vidi genti fangose in quel pantano,
ignude tutte, con sembiante offeso.
112

115

Queste si percotean, non pur con mano
ma con la testa e col petto e coi piedi,
troncandosi co’ denti a brano a brano.
Lo buon maestro disse: “Figlio, or vedi
Vanime di color cui vinse lira;

118

121

124

127

e anche vo’ che tu per certo credi
che sotto l’acqua é gente che sospira,
e fanno pullular quest’ acqua al summo,
come |’occhio ti dice, u’ che s’aggira.
Fitti nel limo dicon: “Tristi fummo
ne l’aere dolce che dal sol s’allegra,
portando dentro accidioso fummo:
or Ci attristiam ne la belletta negra.’
Quest’ inno si gorgoglian ne la strozza,
ché dir nol posson con parola integra.”
Cosi girammo de la lorda pozza
grand’ arco, tra la ripa secca e ’] mézzo,

130

con li occhi volti a chi del fango ingozza.
Venimmo al pié d’una torre al da sezzo.

118

Canto 7

109

112

And I, gazing intently, saw people muddied in
that slough, all naked, with indignant expressions.
They kept striking each other, and not only with
hands, but with head and breast and feet, tearing

each other apart with their teeth, piece by piece.
115

My kind master said: “Son, now behold the souls
of those whom anger vanquished; and I would have
you believe, too, as a certainty,

118

124

127

that under the water are people who are sighing,
making the water bubble at the surface, as your eye
will tell you wherever it turns.
Fixed in the mire, they say: ‘We were gloomy in the
sweet air that the sun makes glad, bearing within us
the fumes of sullenness:
now we languish in the black slime.’ This hymn
they gurgle in their throats, for they cannot fully
form the words.”
So we wound about a large arc of the filthy
swamp, between the dry bank and the wetness, our

130

eyes turned on those who swallow mud.
We came to the foot of a tower at the last.

as

Brg

NOLES

1. Pape Satan .. . aleppe: This line has been much discussed. It is clearly intended to convey an impression of incomprehensibility and is connected with
the idea of Hell as Babel. However, the early commentators agree in taking pape
as an interjection expressing surprise (Latin, papae) and aleppe as the first letter of
the Hebrew alphabet; they disagree on whether aleppe is to be taken as equivalent to “alas,” or as meaning “first” (thus “God”). There may also be a mordant
allusion, in the cry of pape, to the avarice of the popes (Latin, papa, papae),

explicitly attacked later in this canto and elsewhere. The name Satan occurs
nowhere else in the Comedy.
2. Plutus: The name is discussed in the note to 6.115.

8. cursed wolf: The line establishes a special connection between avarice (or,
more broadly, cupidity) and the she-wolf of Canto 1 (see especially lines 94—
102). See also Purg. 20.10, where the she-wolf is explicitly identified as a symbol of avarice.
11. willed on high: Virgil’s formula defeats Plutus, as it silenced Charon and

Minos. Here the claim of a providential reason for the pilgrim’s passage is the
first hint of a main theme of the canto, the relation of Fortune and Providence,

which becomes explicit in lines 73-96.
12. Michael ... proud onslaught: The archangel Michael was traditionally
the commander of the angelic host that expelled the rebel angels (cf. 3.7 and note).
13-15. As when sails . . . to earth: Plutus is being compared to a dismasted
vessel in danger of shipwreck. For the Middle Ages, shipwreck was an instance
of the Fortuna maris, the fortune of the sea. Although associated with avarice,

Plutus’s puffed-up appearance (“swollen face,” line 6) and rabid behavior also
suggest pride and wrath. For Dante’s scheme of sins in Cantos 5-8, see the note
to lines 73-96.
18. bags: “Bagging” is of course suitable to the greedy. Compare the words of
the simoniac Pope Nicholas III at 19.72: “I pocketed . . . myself down here.”
Clerics, proverbial for their avarice, are conspicuous in many medieval visual
representations of Hell, such as Giotto’s Last Judgment in the Scrovegni Chapel
in Padova (ca. 1306), which it is conceivable Dante helped plan: he was in the

vicinity at what may have been the appropriate time.
22-25. As the waves... dance their round: Like Ulysses, Aeneas must sail
near the whirlpool Charybdis and the monster Scylla: part-human, part-wolf,

120

Notes to Canto 7

and part-dolphin. Ancient and medieval authorities located them in the Strait of
Messina between Italy and Sicily (Aen. 3.420-23):

Dextrum Scylla latus, laevum implacata Charybdis
obsidet, atque imo barathri ter gurgite vastos
sorbet in abruptum fluctus rursusque sub auras
erigit alternos, et sidera verberat unda.

[On the right side Scylla, on the left implacable Charybdis
threatens and three times into the deep whirl of the abyss
it suddenly sucks a great flood and again into the air
spews it forth, and the wave lashes the stars.]

Dante’s simile compares the collision of the avaricious (on the left) with the

prodigal (on the right) to that of the currents in the strait. The two phases of
Charybdis’s cycle (“sucks into ... spews forth,” emphasized also in Ovid’s
descriptions in Met. 7.63 and 13.730) are reflected again in the contrasting reproaches of line 30, discussed in the note to line 32.

The concept of virtue as a middle path between extremes was early identified
in Homer’s paired dangers; the identification of Charybdis with avarice/prodigality became proverbial. Dante’s conception depends on the fourth book of
Aristotle’s Ethics, where liberality, a virtue, is explained as the mean between
tightfistedness and prodigality. Although Canto 7 implies the Aristotelian view
of virtue as a mean (discussed by Dante in Convivio 4.17.5—7), this does not seem
true of Cantos 5, 6, and 8, on lechery, gluttony, and wrath.

24. dance their round: Dante’s word for “round” is ridda, a round dance in

which the dancers go in a circle but also weave in and out.
25. people more numerous: That the avaricious are multitudinous is proverbial; see Aen. 6.610—11:

aut qui divitiis soli incubuere repertis
nec partem posuere suis, quae maxima turba est.
[or those who, having found wealth, crouched over it

nor shared any with relatives, which is the largest crowd.]

27. rolling weights: See Aen. 6.616: “saxum ingens volvunt alii” [others roll
a huge rock], an allusion to the myth of Sisyphus, condemned for his robberies
to roll a rock up a hill, only to have it endlessly roll back down.
33. shameful meter: The use of metro [meter], referring to verse—measured
speech—sarcastically alludes to the lack of measure (i.e., moderation) inherent
in avarice and prodigality.

121

Inferno

36. my heart almost pierced through: Note the close parallel with 1.15.
39. tonsured ones to our left: All the avaricious the pilgrim sees are members of the clergy. The term clericus originally meant “chosen by lot,” and Dante
seems to be ironically referring to the dominance of Fortune as well as to the
fact that the cherici [clerics] are chercuti [tonsured]; compare “no hairy covering”
in line 45: the shaving of a portion of the head signified the renunciation of
worldly desires.
40-42. so cross-eyed . . . their spending: These terms, like “undiscerning”
in line 52, imply that the avaricious and prodigal failed to discern the “mean,”
the “right measure” between extremes (see the note to lines 22—25). One notes
the recurrence of the in-vidia [non-seeing] theme (see the note to 6.91—93).

47. popes: In Italian, papi (see line 1, with note).
57. these with hair cut short: By the same logic as clerical tonsure, the shearing
of the prodigals suggests mortification of the indulgence implied by abundant
hair. The closed but empty fist and the shorn forelock suggest abortive economic
transactions: the greedy can no longer seize, the lavish no longer proffer. Compare Dante, “Doglia mi reca ne lo core ardire,” lines 83-84, an attack on ava-

rice: “you have gathered and hoarded with both hands that which so quickly
slips from your grasp” (tr. Foster and Boyde).
58. Bad giving and bad keeping: See Aristotle, Nichomachean Ethics 4.1.1121a:
“prodigality and meanness are excesses and deficiencies, and in two things: in
giving and in taking.”

64. for all the gold . . . the moon: The universe beneath the sphere of the
moon (the sublunar) is the domain of mutable riches and honors (see the note to
2.78). The goddess Fortuna (discussed in the note to lines 73—96) and the everchanging moon were commonly associated, and this passage and Par. 16.82—83
associate Fortune’s wheel (see line 96) with the lunar sphere (Figure 1). The passage reflects Boethius, Consolation 2.2.1-14.

64-66. ail the gold . . . weary souls: On God as the natural object of human
desire, see 4.42, with note.

69. its clutches: The pejorative term for Fortune’s grip sets off Virgil’s exposition of Fortune as the instrument of Providence. Reference to Fortune’s “claws”
(branche) may be an echo of Fortune-as-Scylla.
72. drink in my judgment: Virgil offers the milk of elementary knowledge,
like that given when Philosophy instructs Boethius about Fortune (Consolation
12.2):

122

Notes to Canto 7

Figure 1. Fortune and her wheel. (Based on a drawing in Hildegard of Bingen’s Liber Scivias)

73-96. He whose wisdom . . . rejoices in her blessedness: Virgil’s account
of Fortune rests on the analogy between earthly wealth and power (“‘splendors”
in that they make people illustrious) and the bright heavenly bodies, whose
influence governs all natural change. As the heavenly spheres are governed by
the angels, so “worldly splendors” are governed by Fortune. The analogy implies
a seriously intended parallel between the structure ofsociety and that of the universe, supported by the many references in the canto to the cycles and circles
that characterize the movement of the heavens as Dante understood them. Despite
human condemnation of Fortune, her work is providential: there is no discontinuity between apparent chance and divine order (see Aquinas on Providence:
Summa theol. 1a, q. 22, a. 2-3; Summa contra gentiles 3.94). Virgil’s condensed

account draws on Boethius’s in Consolation 4.6, where Philosophy explains the
divine causality of seemingly random events. Appearing just before the passage
to the second subdivision of Hell (see Cantos 8—9), the cosmic order revealed in

Virgil’s speech also reflects the order of the poem thus far. Fortune’s power is

123

Inferno .

implicit in the circles of the lustful and the gluttonous; the Trojan War, remembered in 5.6465, was for the Middle Ages perhaps the most frequently cited
instance of Fortune’s domination in history (cf. 30.13—15); while the alternating rule of parties in Florence (cf. 6.67—69: one party rising, the other falling)
exemplifies the shifting of power among groups. But the sequence of Cantos 5,
6, and 7 is also one of growing scope: the domestic tragedy of Francesca in Canto
5 is followed in Canto 6 by civic disturbances in Florence, and in Canto 7 by

the universal pattern by which Fortune distributes good and ill to the world.
74. governors: These are the angels, identified in medieval thought with the
intelligences Aristotle saw as governing the celestial spheres. Aquinas (Summa
contra gentiles 3.80) notes that the principalities, an angelic order, are especially
charged with transferring political domination among peoples (Gmelin).
84. like the snake in grass: See Vergil’s Eclogues 3.93, where a “snake lurks
in the grass,” threatening pastoral tranquillity.
87. the other gods: For Dante’s references to the angels (or “intelligences’”’)
as “gods,” see Purg. 32.8 and Par. 28.121; he explains the usage in Convivio
2.4.4-6.

90. so thick come those . . . their turns: Compare 5.13-14 (the souls before
Minos).

91. she who is so crucified: The complaint against Fortune is a medieval commonplace; see Boethius, Consolation 2.1.26, 2.2.29-31, 2.m.1.5—6, and Dante’s
Convivio 4.11.6-9, where Fortune’s gifts are said to take no account of merit.

96. turns her sphere: Usually referred to as a wheel, the “sphere” is important for the analogy with the heavenly intelligences. The chief source for the
image of Fortune’s wheel (the rotating heavens are often called a wheel) is
Boethius; see Consolation 2.1.60—62: “Can you really try to stop the momentum
of her flying wheel?” and 2.2.29—31: “For this is my strength, this game I continually play: I turn my wheel in swift cycles, I enjoy shifting the lowest to
the highest, the highest to the lowest.” Manuscripts of the Consolation had a rich
tradition of illustrations of such images (Courcelle 1967).

98. every star is falling that was rising: The reference to the whirling of
the outermost visible cosmic wheel closes Virgil’s account of Fortune as a celestial minister on a cosmic note that contrasts strongly with the violent half-circles
of the avaricious and prodigal. See also the conclusion to Canto 11.
105. the swamp called Styx: Servius, on Aen. 6.323, notes that the name of
the Styx means “sorrow” (tristitia). Macrobius interprets it as “whatever immerses

124

Notes to Canto 7

human souls in the gulf of hatreds”; these allegories are discussed in Additional
Note 2.

116. those whom anger vanquished: The phrase recalls the self-defeating
wrath of Plutus, the monster of avarice, at the beginning of the canto.
123. the fumes of sullenness: Whether Dante wished to subdivide the angry
into two groups, those “whom anger vanquished” and the passively angry (or
sullen), or whether the second group represent another category of deadly sin,
the slothful (referred to in Italian as accidiosi, here translated “sullen”’), has caused
much disagreement. We incline to the view of Russo (1967), in which the
unifying category of the fifth circle is tristitia [sorrow, grief], which is a passion
that includes as its “effects” pride, envy, wrath, and accidia or sloth. See the discussion of incontinence in the notes to 11.70—75.
125-26. This hymn they gurgle in their throats: A final reference to singing, “music,” and distorted language.
130. at the last: The canto ends with a word of finality; we are approaching
one of the principal divisions of Hell (see 11.70—90).

1
40)

Io dico, seguitando, ch’assai prima
che noi fossimo al pié de I’alta torre,
li occhi nostri n’andar suso a la cima
per due fiammette che i vedemmo porre,
e un/altra da lungi render cenno
tanto ch’a pena il potea |’occhio torre.
E io mi volsi al mar di tutto ’] senno;

10

13

16

19

Jip

25

28

dissi: “Questo che dice? e che risponde
quell’altro foco? e chi son quei che ’] fenno?”
Ed elli a me: “Su per le sucide onde
gia scorgere puoi quello che s’aspetta,
se "| fummo del pantan nol ti nasconde.”
Corda non pinse mai da sé saetta
che si corresse via per l’aere snella,
com’ io vidi una nave piccioletta
venir per l’acqua verso noi in quella,
sotto ’l governo d’un sol galeoto,
che gridava: “Or se’ giunta, anima fella!”
“Flegias, Flegias, tu gridi a voto,”
disse lo mio segnore, “a questa volta:
piu non ci avrai che sol passando il loto.”
Qual é colui che grande inganno ascolta
che li sia fatto e poi se ne rammarca,
fecesi Flegias ne l’ira accolta.
Lo duca mio discese ne la barca
e poi mi fece intrare appresso lui;

e sol quand’ io fui dentro parve carca.
Tosto che ’] duca e io nel legno fui,
segando se ne va l’antica prora
de l’acqua pit che non suol con altrui.

126

CANTO

8

Signals—Phlegyas and his boat—crossing Styx—Filippo Argenti—the
walls of Dis—the gate of Dis—the devils—parley—Virgil excluded

I say, continuing, that well before we reached the
foot of the high tower, our eyes went up to its
summit

because of two small flames we saw placed there,
and another replying from so far away that the
eye could hardly seize it.
And I turned toward the sea of all wisdom; I said:

10

13

16

19

De

“What does this one say? and what does that other
fire answer? and who are those doing this?”
And he to me: “Over the slimy waves you can
already make out what they are waiting for, if the
fumes of the swamp do not hide it.”
A bowstring never propelled an arrow to fly
through the air so swiftly as a little boat I saw
come toward us in that instant over the water,

governed by a single oarsman, who was shouting:
“Now you are caught, wicked soul!”
“Phlegyas, Phlegyas, you are shouting uselessly,”
said my lord, “this time; you will have us no longer
than passing over the bog.”
As one who hears of a great deception done to
him and then mutters of it, so became Phlegyas in

2a

28

his contained anger.
My leader stepped down into the boat and then
had me enter after him; and only when I was aboard
did it seem laden.
As soon as my leader and I were in the bark, the
ancient prow set forth, cutting more of the water
than it does with others.

127),

Inferno |

31

34

Mentre noi corravam la morta gora,
dinanzi mi si fece un pien di fango,
e disse: “Chi se’ tu che vieni anzi ora?”
E io a lui: “S’)’ vegno, non rimango;
ma tu chi se’, che si se’ fatto brutto?”

37

Rispuose: “Vedi che son un che piango.”
E io a lui: “Con piangere e con lutto,
spirito maladetto, ti rimani;
ch’i’ ti conosco, ancor sie lordo tutto.”

40

43

46

49

DZ

55

Allor distese al legno ambo le mani;

per che ’] maestro accorto lo sospinse,
dicendo: “Via costa con li altri cani!”
Lo collo poi con le braccia mi cinse;
basciommi ’] volto e disse: “Alma sdegnosa,
benedetta colei che ’n te s’incinse!
Quei fu al mondo persona orgogliosa;
bonta non é che sua memoria fregi:
cosi s’é l’ombra sua qui furiosa.
Quanti si tegnon or 1a st gran regi
che qui staranno come porci in brago,
di sé lasciando orribili dispregi!”
E io: “Maestro, molto sarei vago
di vederlo attuffare in questa broda
prima che noi uscissimo del lago.”
Ed elli a me: “Avante che la proda
ti si lasci veder, tu sarai sazio:

58

61

64

di tal disio convien che tu goda.”
Dopo cio poco vid’ io quello strazio
far di costui a le fangose genti,
che Dio ancor ne lodo e ne ringrazio.
Tutti gridavano: “A Filippo Argenti!”
e ’l fiorentino spirito bizzarro
in s¢ medesmo si volvea co’ denti.
Quivi il lasciammo, che pit non ne narro;

ma ne l’orecchie mi percosse un duolo,
perch’io avante l’occhio intento sbarro.
67

Lo buon maestro disse: “Omai, figliuolo,

s’appressa la citta c’™ha nome Dite,
coi gravi cittadin, col grande stuolo.”
128

Canto 8

31

While we were coursing the dead channel, before
me rose up one covered with mud, who said: “Who
are you, who come before your hour?”

34

And I to him: “If I come, I do not remain; but who
are you, who have become so foul?” He replied:

37

40

43

46

49

a2

“You see that I am one who weeps.”
And I to him: “With weeping and mourning,
cursed spirit, now remain; for I recognize you,
though you are filthy all over.”
Then he stretched out toward the boat both his
hands; but my master, alert, pushed him off, saying:
“Away, over there with the other dogs!”
My neck then with his arm he embraced}. he
kissed my face and said: “Disdainful soul, blessed be
she who was pregnant with you!
In the world he was a person filled with pride;
there is no act of goodness to adorn his memory:
therefore his shade is so furious here.
How many consider themselves great kings up
above, who here will be like pigs in the mire, leaving
behind horrible dispraise of themselves!”
And I: “Master, much would I desire to see him

ducked in this broth before we leave the lake.”
5D

And he to me: “Before the shore lets itself be seen,

you will be satisfied: it is fitting that such a desire
58

61

be fulfilled.”
A little later I saw him torn apart by those muddy
people in such a way that I still praise God and
thank him for it.
All were crying: “At Filippo Argenti!” and the wild
Florentine spirit turned on himself with his teeth.

64

There we left him, I tell no more of him; for my

67

ears were now struck by a shrieking that made me
open wide my eyes, intent on what lay ahead.
My good master said: “Now, my son, we approach
the city whose name is Dis, with the weighty citizens,
the great host.”

129

Inferno .

70

E io: “Maestro, gia le sue meschite
la entro certe ne la valle cerno,

HS

vermiglie come se di foco uscite
fossero.”” Ed ei mi disse: “Il foco etterno
ch’entro |’affoca le dimostra rosse,

76

9

82

come tu vedi in questo basso inferno.”
Noi pur giugnemmo dentro a l’alte fosse
che vallan quella terra sconsolata;
le mura mi parean che ferro fosse.
Non sanza prima far grande aggirata,
venimmo in parte dove il nocchier forte
“Usciteci,” grido: “qui é l’intrata.”
Io vidi piu di mille in su le porte
da ciel piovuti, che stizzosamente

85

88

Oi

dicean: “Chi é costui che sanza morte
va per lo regno de la morta gente?”
E ’] savio mio maestro fece segno
di voler parlar loro segretamente.
Allor chiusero un poco il gran disdegno
e disser: “Vien tu solo, e quei sen vada
che si ardito intro per questo regno.
Sol si ritorni per la folle strada:
pruovi, se sa; ché tu qui rimarrai,

che li ha’ iscorta si buia contrada.”
94

Pensa, lettor, se i0 mi sconfortai

97

nel suon de le parole maladette,
ché non credetti ritornarci mai.
“O caro duca mio, che piu di sette
volte m’hai sicurta renduta e tratto
d’alto periglio che ’ncontra mi stette,

100

103

106

non mi lasciar,” diss’ io, “cosi disfatto;

e se ’] passar piu oltre ci € negato,
ritroviam |’orme nostre insieme ratto.”
E quel segnor che li m’avea menato
mi disse: “Non temer, ché ’] nostro passo
non ci puo torre alcun: da tal n’é dato.
Ma qui m/attendi, e lo spirito lasso
conforta e ciba di speranza buona,
ch’i’ non ti lascero nel mondo basso.”
130

Canto 8

70

73

76

12)

82

And I: “Master, already I discern its mosques there
clearly within the moat, as red as if they had just
come out of the fire.”
And he said to me: “The eternal fire that burns
within it makes them glow red, as you see in this lower
Hell
Now we arrived within the deep moats that
fortify that unconsolable city; the walls seemed to me
to be of iron.
Not without first making a large circle did we
reach a place where the pilot loudly cried: “Get out.
Here is the entrance.”
At the gate I saw more than a thousand that had
rained down from Heaven, who were saying angrily:
“Who is he there, that without death

85

88

goes through the kingdom of the dead?” And my
wise master made a sign that he wished to speak
with them secretly.
Then they restrained somewhat their great disdain
and said: “You come alone, and send him away, who

91

94

so boldly entered this kingdom.
Let him return alone along his foolhardy path; let
him try if he can; for you will remain here, who have
escorted him across so dark a territory.”
Think, reader, if | became weak at the sound of

those cursed words, for I did not believe I would

ever return here.
OF

“O my dear leader, who more than seven times

have kept me safe and saved me from deep peril that
stood against me,
100

do not leave me,” I said, “so undone; and if

passing further is denied us, let us retrace our
footsteps quickly together.”
103

And that lord who had led me there, said: “Do not

106

fear, for our passage no one can prevent, it is granted
by such a one.
But here await me, and strengthen your weary
spirit, feeding it with good hope, for I will not leave
you in the underworld.”
131

Inferno

109

2

hits)

118

124

Cosi sen va, e quivi m’abbandona
lo dolce padre, e io rimagno in forse,
ché si e no nel capo mi tenciona.
Udir non potti quello ch’a lor porse;
ma ei non stette 1a con essi guari,
che ciascun dentro a pruova si ricorse.
Chiuser la porta que’ nostri avversari
nel petto al mio segnor, che fuor rimase
e rivolsesi a me con passi rari.
Li occhi a la terra e le ciglia avea rase
d’ogne baldanza, e dicea ne’ sospiri:
“Chi m’ha negate le dolenti case?”
E a me disse: “Tu, perch’ io m/’adiri,

non sbigottir, ch’io vincero la prova,
124

127

130

qual ch’a la difension dentro s’aggiri.
Questa lor tracotanza non é nova,
ché gia l’usaro a men segreta porta,
la qual sanza serrame ancor si trova:
sovr’ essa vedestu la scritta morta.
E gia di qua da lei discende l’erta,
passando per li cerchi sanza scorta,
tal che per lui ne fia la terra aperta.”

LBZ,

Canto 8

109

Thus my sweet father goes off and abandons me

iy

there, and I remain in doubt, for “yes” and “no”
quarrel in my head.
I could not hear what he proffered them; but he
hardly stood with them there, before they vied to run
back inside.

115

They closed the gate, those adversaries of ours, in

118

121

my lord’s face, who remained outside and turned
back to me with slow steps.
His eyes were on the ground, his brow shorn of
all boldness, and he was saying, as he sighed: “Who
has denied me the sorrowing houses?”
And to me he said: “You, though I am angered, do
not be dismayed, for I will overcome this test,

127

however they scurry about inside to prevent it.
This overweening of theirs is not new; they used it
once before at a less secret gate, which still cannot be
barred:
above it you saw the dead writing. And already,

130

passing through the circles without a guide,
such a one that by him the city will be opened to

124

on this side of it, there comes down the slope,

us.

”?

as

133

NOTES

1. I say, continuing, that well before: The unusual “continuing” and the
return to a narrative moment logically earlier than the end of the previous canto
(7.130) have occasioned comment. Padoan (1993) argues that they are evidence
that the first seven cantos of the Inferno had already been published (ca. 1315; see
3.95—96 with note) and therefore could no longer be revised.
According to Boccaccio’s Esposizioni and his biographies of Dante, Dante had
written the first seven cantos of the poem before his exile but had left the manuscript behind in Florence, receiving it again only a number of years later. There
is no other evidence for this idea, however, and it is extremely unlikely, on the
evidence of Dante’s other works, that the Comedy was begun before 1306. An
interruption at some later date may of course have taken place.
4—6. two small flames . . . hardly seize it: As will become clear later in the
canto, the devils consider themselves still in a state of war, driven back into their

city walls, with outposts like this tower in the surrounding countryside (like that
surrounding an Italian city-state).
17. a single oarsman: Dante’s term is galeoto (from galea, galley), literally a
slave rowing in a galley, not the same word as Galeotto in 5.137 (see note). There
is no further reference to the boat’s means of locomotion.

18. Now you are caught, wicked soul: Phlegyas is presumably addressing
the pilgrim, whom he mistakes for a soul condemned to the Styx.
19. Phlegyas: A figure in Greek mythology, a king of Thessaly who avenged
his daughter’s rape by Apollo by burning the god’s temple at Delphi; Vergil makes
him an exemplary figure (Aen. 6.618-—20):
Phlegyasque miserrimus omnis
admonet et magna testatur voce per umbras:
discite iustitiam moniti et non temnere divos.

[And most wretched Phlegyas
warns all and testifies with a great voice through the shadows:
Learn justice being warned, and not to contemn the gods.|

134

Notes to Canto 8

Dante associated Phlegyas’s name with the Greek root phleg-, which he knew
from Servius and elsewhere to refer to fire (as in the the name of the river
Phlegethon, in Greek the present participle of a verb “to burn”).
27. only when I was aboard . . . laden: Only the pilgrim has a body to weight
the boat. The incident derives from Aeneas’s crossing the Styx in Charon’s boat
(Aen. 6.412-16):
Simul accipit alveo
ingentem Aenean. Gemuit sub pondere cumba
sutilis et multam accepit rimosa paludem.
Tandem trans fluvium incolumis vatemque virumque
informi limo glaucaque exponit in ulva.
[At once he accepts into his boat
the gigantic Aeneas. The bark groans with the weight,
being sewn together, and admits through its rifts much of the swamp.
Finally beyond the river he deposits unharmed both the prophetess and
the hero
on the gray shore with its shapeless mud.|
29-30. cutting more ... with others: It is lower in the water because of
the pilgrim’s weight. Compare Aen. 5.2, of sailing: “fluctusque atros Aquilone
secabat” [he cut the dark flood before the north wind].
32-51. before me rose up one. . . horrible dispraise of themselves: The
episode of Filippo Argenti (he is named in line 61) is the subject of a famous
panting by the French painter Eugéne Delacroix (1798-1863), Dante and Virgil
Crossing the Styx, now in the Louvre.

36. You see that I am one who weeps: The line echoes a sonnet by Guido
Cavalcanti, “Vedete ch’i’ son un che vo piangendo” [You see that I am one
who go weeping]; like Filippo Argenti, Cavalcanti was notoriously quarrelsome.
43-45. My neck then ... pregnant with you: Virgil’s enthusiasm for the
pilgrim’s violent anger against Filippo Argenti seems to assert the difference
between a justified anger against sin and the anger and sullenness punished here.
Still, a major theme of the journey through Hell is that the pilgrim usually shares
in the sin he is contemplating, at least in the sense of having the potentiality for
it within himself (the most striking instance so far is in Canto 5).
A further peculiarity of these lines is that they seem to be the only reference
in the entire poem to Dante’s mother and clearly, if somewhat diffusely, echo
the “Ave Maria”: “Blessed art thou among women and blessed is the fruit ofthy
womb ...” (cf. Luke 1.28).

13:

Inferno

61. Filippo Argenti: This was a Florentine, according to Boccaccio a member of the Adimari family (Black partisans denounced by Dante in Par. 16.115—
20), who was so arrogant that he had his horse shod with silver, hence his sur-

name; in Decameron 9.8 Boccaccio relates an incident involving his temper.
Nothing more is known about the man, though several early commentators relate
that his brother gained possession of some of Dante’s property when it was confiscated.
63. turned on himself with his teeth: Like the souls in 7.114.

65. shrieking: Dante hears the shrieking from within the City of Dis; in Aen.
6.557—61, Aeneas and the Sybil hear cries, blows, and rattling chains from inside
the walls of Dis (see the note to line 68).
68. the city whose name is Dis: Dante’s division of Hell into two main parts
(upper and lower Hell; cf. line 74) derives from Vergil’s. Within the “walls of
Dis” (moenia Ditis [Aen. 6.541, 548-49]), which Aeneas and the Sybil do not
enter, lies the pit of Tartarus, where the worst criminals and rebels against the

gods are punished, described to Aeneas by the Sybil (Aen. 6.562—627). For the
name Dis, see the note to 6.115.

69. the weighty citizens, the great host: The devils, angels fallen from
Heaven (Apoc. 12.7-—9), still continuing the war.

70. mosques: Dante is repeating the common medieval Christian slander that
Islam was a form of devil worship and that the characteristic architecture of the
mosque and minaret was inspired by the devils.

77. that unconsolable city: See 3.1, “THE GRIEVING

CITY,” with note.

78. the walls seemed .. . of iron: So Vergil says of the gate of the walls of
Dis: Aen. 6.554 (ferrea turris, iron tower) and Aen. 6.630-31 (spoken by the
Sybil):

Cyclopum educta caminis
moenia conspicio atque adverso fornice portas. . . .
[I discern the walls brought forth from the Cyclops’s furnaces
and the gates with their projecting vaults. . . .]

136

Notes to Canto 8

82-117. I saw more than a thousand .. . with slow steps: This initial
phase of the exciting episode of Virgil’s being blocked at the city of Dis (the
entire episode takes up most of Cantos 8 and 9), in addition to emphasizing
the obstinacy characteristic of the devils and of the sins of malice punished
within the city (see 11.22—66), is also a comment on the fact that in the Aeneid

Aeneas and the Sybil may not enter there. The Sybil’s explanation for this
is that no virtuous person may cross its threshold. Virgil is blocked here because, in Dante’s view, this is where Vergil was blocked in life, as the sixth
book of the Aeneid shows (see the note to 9.38—42); the question of the rele-

vance of this episode to Virgil’s damnation is discussed in the notes to Purgatorio 22.
What the Sybil tells Aeneas in Aen. 6.553-—54, that “not even the power of
the heaven dwellers can beat down in war” the gates of Dis, is untrue for the

Christian Dante. In the context of the entire Inferno, Dante is establishing an
important difference between Vergil’s imperfect knowledge of the underworld
and his own Christian reliance on God, which enables the believer, with God’s
help, to confront the lowest depths of evil, including Satan himself; see Romans
8.38-39:
For I am confident that neither death, nor life, nor angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor might, nor

height, nor depth, nor any other creature, shall be able to separate us from
the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.

Compare Matt. 16.18:

Thou art Peter; and upon this rock I will build my church, and the gates
of Hell shall not prevail against it.
87. he wished to speak with them secretly: Discussed in the note on lines
118-23.

90. so boldly . . . his foolhardy path: The devils’ phrases echo the dialogue
about the pilgrim’s fears in Canto 2 (cf. 2.35 folle, and 2.123 ardire), as they perhaps know.
94-96. Think, reader . . . ever return here: The first apostrophe of the reader
in the poem, signaling the importance of the episode. Gmelin pointed out that
there are seven such apostrophes in each cantica. The others in the Inferno are
9.61-63, 16.127-30, 20.19-22, 22.118, 25.46—48, and 34.22-24. The present

137

Inferno

episode is the only one in the Inferno to have two such heightenings of tone (here
and at 9.61—63) (see the notes to 9.61—63 and 34.22—24).

96. I did not believe: The phrase is obviously not to be taken in the strong
sense of despair, the utter loss of faith and hope, which would in itself constitute
damnation, but in a state of doubt. The possibility of despair may, however, be
the ultimate threat of the Medusa (9.52—63).
97. more than seven times: This is a biblical turn of phrase, but the statement is accurate, as the reader can verify.

115. adversaries: “Adversary” is the literal meaning of the Greek diabolos [devil],
literally, one who throws (something) against one or opposes one; the shutting
of the gate is a literal enactment of the root idea of the term.

116. in my lord’s face: The Italian nel petto al mio segnor means literally “‘in
(or against) my lord’s breast,” helping suggest the significance of the walls of Dis
in the overall body analogy discussed in Additional Note 2.
118-22. His eyes were on the ground ... I will overcome this test:
Virgil’s discouragement and his repeated references to himself (“Who has denied
me,” line 120; “I will overcome this test,” line 122) suggest that he has been

overconfident, has supposed that his own strength would be sufficient to overcome the rebellious devils here, as it had been with Charon, Plutus, and
others.

124-26. This overweening ... still cannot be barred: A reference to
the resistance of the devils to the Harrowing of Hell by Christ (see the notes
to 4.52-63), of which this episode in its entirety is a figural reenactment (see
Musa 1974).

127. the dead writing: The writing proclaiming death (i.e., damnation) in
3.1-9. At the beginning of the Purgatorio, the Inferno will be referred to as “la
morta poesi” [dead poetry]. Note the connection between “Abandon every hope,
you who enter” and the present episode.

128-30. already, on this side of it . . . the city will be opened to us:
Virgil’s thought has moved from his own defeat here to the Harrowing of
Hell—that is, from his human helplessness to a chief instance of God’s om-

138

Notes to Canto 8

nipotence—and he suddenly has what can only be called a visionary moment:
he knows, perhaps sees, that the one who will open the city (the next canto
will show this to be an angel) is already some distance within the outer gate.
Virgil’s knowledge is discussed further in the notes to 9.7—9, 38-42, 61-63,
and 10.100-108.

139

CANTO

9

Quel color che vilta di fuor mi pinse,
veggendo il duca mio tornare in volta,
piu tosto dentro il suo novo ristrinse.
Attento si fermo com’ uom ch’ascolta;

ché l’occhio nol potea menare a lunga
per l’aere nero e per la nebbia folta.
“Pur a noi converra vincer la punga,”
comincio el, “se non... Tal ne s’offerse.
10

13

16

i

Oh quanto tarda a me ch’altri qui giunga!”’
I’ vidi ben si com’ ei ricoperse
lo cominciar con I’altro che poi venne,
che fur parole a le prime diverse;
ma nondimen paura il suo dir dienne,

perch’ io traeva la parola tronca
forse a peggior sentenzia che non tenne.
“In questo fondo de la trista conca
discende mai alcun del primo grado,
che sol per pena ha la speranza cionca?”
Questa question fec’ io; e quei: “Di rado
incontra,” mi rispuose, “che di noi

22

25

28

faccia il cammino alcun per qual io vado.
Ver é ch’altra fiata qua git fui,
congiurato da quella Eriton cruda
che richiamava l’ombre a’ corpi sui.
Di poco era di me la carne nuda,
ch’ella mi fece intrar dentr’ a quel muro
per trarne un spirto del cerchio di Giuda.
Quell’ é ’] pit basso. loco e ’] pit oscuro,
e ’] pit lontan dal ciel che tutto gira:
ben so ’] cammin; pero ti fa sicuro.

140

CANTO

9

Virgil’s dismay—the Furies—Medusa—the heavenly messenger—the
gate opened—sixth circle: the heretics

The color that cowardice brought out on my face,
seeing my leader turn back, caused him more quickly
to master his own new pallor.
He stood still, attentive, like one who listens; for

his glance could not go far through the black air and
the thick fog.
“Still, we must win the fight,” he began, “if not...

10

Such a one was offered to us. Oh how long it
seems to me until someone arrives!”
I saw well how he covered up his beginning with
what came next, words different from the first;

13

16

19

22

but nonetheless his speech made me afraid, for I
drew from his truncated words a meaning worse
than perhaps they held.
“Into this depth of the sad pit does anyone from
the first level ever come, of those whose only
punishment is to have hope cut off?”
Such was my question; and: “Rarely does it
happen,” he replied, “that any of us makes the
journey I am taking.
It is true that I have been down here once before,

conjured by that harsh Erichtho who called souls
back to their bodies.
25

28

My flesh had been naked of me only a little while,

when she made me enter those walls, to bring up a
spirit from the circle of Judas.
That is the lowest place and the darkest and the
farthest from the sky that turns all things: well
do I know the way; therefore be free of care.

141

Inferno

oH

Questa palude che ’] gran puzzo spira
cigne dintorno la citta dolente,
uw’ non potemo intrare omai sanz’ ira.”

34

E altro disse, ma non |’ho a mente;

pero che l’occhio m’avea tutto tratto
ver ]’alta torre a la cima rovente,
37

dove in un punto furon dritte ratto
tre furie infernal di sangue tinte,
che membra feminine avieno e atto,

40

e con idre verdissime eran cinte;

serpentelli e ceraste avien per crine,

onde le fiere tempie erano avvinte.
43

E quei, che ben conobbe le meschine

de la regina de |’etterno pianto,
“Guarda,” mi disse, “le feroci Erine.
46

49

52

55

58

Quest’ € Megera dal sinistro canto;
quella che piange dal destro é Aletto;
Tesifon é nel mezzo”; e tacque a tanto.
Con l’unghie si fendea ciascuna il petto;
battiensi a palme e gridavan si alto
ch’i’ mi strinsi al poeta per sospetto.
“Vegna Medusa: si ’] farem di smalto,”
dicevan tutte riguardando in giuso;
“mal non vengiammo in Teséo I’assalto.”
“Volgiti ’n dietro e tien lo viso chiuso;
ché se ’] Gorgon si mostra e tu ’] vedessi,
nulla sarebbe di tornar mai suso.”
Cosi disse ’] maestro; ed elli stessi
mi volse, e non si tenne a le mie mani,

che con le sue ancor non mi chiudessi.
61

64

67

O voi ch’avete li ’ntelletti sani,

muirate la dottrina che s’asconde
sotto ’l velame de li versi strani.
E gia venia su per le torbide onde
un fracasso d’un suon pien di spavento,
per cui tremavano amendue le sponde,
non altrimenti fatto che d’un vento
impettioso per li avversi ardori,
che fier la selva e sanz’ alcun rattento
142

Canto 9

31

This swamp that breathes forth the great stench,
girds the grieving city all about, where now we
cannot enter without wrath.”

34

And he said more, but I do not remember it; for

37

my eyes had made me all intent on the high tower
with its glowing summit,
where suddenly, in an instant, stood up three
Furies of Hell, stained with blood, who had the limbs

40

43

46

49

S2

55

58

61

64

and gestures of women
and were girt with bright green water snakes;
little asps and horned serpents they had for hair,
which wound about their fierce temples.
And he, who well knew the maid-servants of the

queen of eternal weeping, “Look,” he told me, “at the
ferocious Erinyes.
This is Megaera on the left; she who weeps on the
right there is Allecto; Tisiphone is in the middle,” and
he fell silent.
With her nails each was tearing at her breast; they
beat themselves with their palms and shrieked so
loudly that for fear I drew closer to the poet.
“Let Medusa come: so we will turn him to
concrete,” they were all saying, looking down; “we
did ill in not avenging on Theseus his attack.”
“Turn around and keep your eyes closed; for if the
Gorgon appears and you should see her, there would
never be any going back up.”
So spoke my master; and he himself turned me,
and he did not stop with my hands, but closed me up
with his own as well.
O you who have sound intellects, gaze on the
teaching that is hidden beneath the veil of the strange
verses.
And already, over across the turbid waves, came
the crashing of a fearful sound, at which both the
banks were shaking,

67

not otherwise than of a wind made impetuous by
conflicting heats, that strikes the wood and without
any resistance
143

Inferno

70

73

76

79

82

85

88

91

94

97

li rami schianta, abbatte e porta fori;

dinanzi polveroso va superbo,
e fa fuggir le fiere e li pastori.
Li occhi mi sciolse e disse: “Or drizza il nerbo
del viso su per quella schiuma antica
per indi ove quel fummo é piu acerbo.”
Come le rane innanzi a la nimica
biscia per l’acqua si dileguan tutte
fin ch’a la terra ciascuna s’abbica:
vid’ io piu di mille anime distrutte
fuggir cosi dinanzi ad un ch’al passo
passava Stige con le piante asciutte.
Dal volto rimovea quell’ aere grasso,
menando la sinistra innanzi spesso,
e sol di quell’ angoscia parea lasso.
Ben m/accorsi ch’elli era da ciel messo,

e volsimi al maestro; e quei fe segno
ch’i’ stessi queto ed inchinassi ad esso.
Ahi quanto mi parea pien di disdegno!
Venne a la porta e con una verghetta
Vaperse, che non v’ebbe alcun ritegno.
“O cacciati del ciel, gente dispetta,”
comincio elli in su l’orribil soglia,
“ond’ esta oltracotanza in voi s’alletta?
Perché recalcitrate a quella voglia
a cui non puote il fin mai esser mozzo,
e che piu volte v’ha cresciuta doglia?
Che giova ne le fata dar di cozzo?
Cerbero vostro, se ben vi ricorda,

ne porta ancor pelato il mento e ’] gozzo.”
100

Poi si rivolse per la strada lorda,
e non fé motto a noi, ma fé sembiante

103

106

d’omo cui altra cura stringa e morda
che quella di colui che li é davante;
€ noi movemmo i piedi inver’ la terra,
sicuri appresso le parole sante.
Dentro li ’ntrammo sanz’ alcuna guerra;
e i0, ch’avea di riguardar disio
la condizion che tal fortezza serra,

144

Canto 9

70

Ws

76

79

82

85

88

91

94

i

shatters the branches, beats them down, and

carries them away; full of dust it goes proudly on
and makes the beasts and shepherds flee.
He loosed my eyes and said: “Now direct your
beam of sight out over that ancient foam, there where
the smoke is darkest.”
Like frogs before the enemy snake, who scatter
themselves through the water until each huddles on
the bottom:
so saw I more than a thousand shattered souls
fleeing before one who was walking across Styx with
dry feet.
From his face he was moving that greasy air,
waving his left hand before him frequently, and only
of that discomfort did he seem weary.
Well did I perceive that he was sent from Heaven,
and I turned to my master, who made a sign that I
should stand still and bow to him.
Ah, how full of disdain he seemed to me! He

came to the gate and with a little wand he opened it,
for nothing held it.
“O driven forth from Heaven, despised people,” he
began on the horrid threshold, “how is this
overweening nursed in you?
Why do you kick back against that Will whose
ends can never be cut short and which has many
times increased your suffering?
What is the good of butting against fate? Your
Cerberus,

100

if you remember, still has his chin and

gullet stripped because of it.”
Then he turned back along the filthy way and said
not a word to us; he had the look of a man whom

other cares urge and gnaw
103

106

than his who stands before him; and we directed

our feet toward the city, unafraid after the holy
words.
We entered in without any battle; and I, in my
desire to examine the conditions enclosed by such a
fortress,
145

Inferno

109

com’ io fui dentro, l’occhio intorno invio:

e veggio ad ogne man grande campagna,
piena di duolo e di tormento rio.
2

1S

118

atl

124

127

130

133

Si come ad Arli, ove Rodano stagna,

si com’ a Pola, presso del Carnaro
ch’Italia chiude e suoi termini bagna,
fanno i sepulcri tutt’ il loco varo,
cosi facevan quivi d’ogne parte,
salvo che ’] modo v’era pid amaro:
ché tra li avelli fiamme erano sparte,
per le quali eran si del tutto accesi
che ferro piu non chiede verun’ arte.
Tutti li lor coperchi eran sospesi,
e fuor n’uscivan si duri lamenti
che ben parean di miseri e d’offesi.
E io: “Maestro, quai son quelle genti
che, seppellite dentro da quell’ arche,
si fan sentir coi sospiri dolenti?”
E quelli a me: “Qui son li eresiarche
con lor seguaci, d’ogne setta, e molto
piu che non credi son le tombe carche.
Simile qui con simile é sepolto,
€ 1 monimenti son piu e men caldi.”
E poi ch’a la man destra si fu volto,
passammo tra i martiri e li alti spaldi.

146

Canto 9

109

as soon as I was inside, send my eye around; and

I see on every hand a broad plain, full of grief and
harsh torments.
112

As at Arles, where the Rhone makes its delta, as

at Pola, near the Carnaro that encloses Italy and bathes
its boundaries,
115
118

tombs variegate the place, so they did here on
every side, except that the manner was more bitter:
for among the tombs flames were scattered, by
which they were so entirely fired that no art asks for
iron that is hotter.

121

All their covers were lifted, and from them came

124

forth laments so grievous that they surely seemed
those of wretches suffering within.
And I: “Master, who are the people buried within
these arks, who make themselves heard with

127

anguished sighs?”
And he to me: “Here are the chiefs of heresies
with their followers, of every sect, and much
more than you believe are the tombs laden.

130

Like with like is buried here, and the monuments

133

are more and less hot.” And when he had turned to
the right,
we passed between the torments and the high
battlements.

as

147

NOTES

1-3. The color ... new pallor: That is, Virgil, seeing that the pilgrim has
turned pale with fear, more energetically represses his own pallor, causing his
blood (!) to flow more freely into his face. Vilta [cowardice] was used of the
pilgrim’s fear in 2.45.
5-6. his glance . . . the thick fog: Again the theme of the difficulty of sight,
in terms of the Platonic theory of vision discussed in the note to 4.11.
7-9. Still, we must win .. . until someone arrives: Virgil’s listening attitude and these words show that he has lost the clear knowledge of the location
of the “one” to whom he referred in the last words of Canto 8. His “still” (Italian, pur) has the force in this context of “even if the messenger is not in fact
coming.” If perhaps only rhetorically, he entertains the possibility that they will
not “win the fight” (i.e., gain entrance to the city), momentarily envisaging the
negative consequences (“if not. . .”). As the pilgrim notices in lines 10-12, the
next sentences (from “Such a one” to “until someone arrives’) are meant to cover
up his spontaneous expression of uncertainty.

8. Such a one was offered: The Italian pronoun in s’offerse has no gender,
but the reference is presumably to Beatrice’s implicit offer of heavenly assistance
related in Canto 2. Note the parallel with the use of the verb offrirsi in 1.62.

15. a meaning worse than perhaps they held: That is, Virgil was perhaps
not expressing fear; perhaps he was exploring the logical implications of the
assurance he was given: if they are not to enter the gate, some other path through
Hell will have to be found.
16-18. Into this depth . . . hope cut off: The pilgrim’s anxiety and curiosity prompt the natural question (see the note to 8.82—117). Compare “hope cut
off” with “truncated words” (line 14) and “cut short” (line 95).

22-30. It is true ... be free of care: The story of Virgil’s soul having been
sent by the sorceress Erichtho to the lowest part of Hell is apparently of Dante’s
invention, based on an episode in Lucan’s Pharsalia in which Erichtho (Lucan’s
invention, called by him effera [savage]) conjures up a dead soldier to learn the
outcome of the imminent battle of Pharsalus, in which Julius Caesar defeated
Pompey the Great (48 B.c.). This is one of the few places in the Comedy where
Dante even faintly associates his Virgil with the medieval traditions of the historical Vergil’s having been a sorcerer. This earlier descent of the pilgrim’s guide
was perhaps suggested by the Sybil’s (Aen. 6.562—65).

148

Notes to Canto 9

27. the circle of Judas: Judecca, the place of the worst traitors (Canto 34). As we
know from 5.107, some circles of Hell are named for their most famous occupants.
29. the sky that turns all things: The Crystalline Heaven, or Primum Mobile;
possibly, the Empyrean (the Italian can also mean “that surrounds all things”).

38—42. three Furies . . . about their fierce temples: Vergil’s Sybil describes
Tisiphone and her sisters (the three Furies, or Erinyes, punishers of crimes of
blood) as the gatekeepers of the city of Dis (Aen. 6.570-75):
. . continuo sontis ultrix accincta flagello
Tisiphoné quatit insultans, torvosque sinistra
intentans anguis vocat agmina saeva sororum
tum demum horrisono stridentes cardine sacrae
panduntur portae. Cernis custodia qualis
vestibulo sedeat, facies quae limina servet?
[. . . always, taker of vengeance for crime, brandishing her whip,
Tisiphoné towering shakes her frightful snakes
and, holding them out, calls forth the fierce battle line of her sisters.

Then finally the cursed gates, resounding fearfully on their hinges,
are opened. Do you see what kind of guardian
she makes sitting at the entrance, what kind of face guards the threshold?]

Dante clearly saw this passage as one of the keys to Vergil’s conception of why
Aeneas cannot descend to Tartarus (see the note to 8.82—117). Allecto, in the

Aeneid a personification of war fever, is described as having hydras (poisonous
water snakes) for hair (Aen. 7.447).
49-50. With her nails . .. with their palms: Traditional classical gestures
of rage and grief.
52. Let Medusa

come: Dante’s principal source on the Medusa was the

account, in Met. 4.606—5.249, of how Neptune raped one of the three Gorgons,
sisters, in the temple of Minerva, who turned her into the monster with snakes

for hair, turning all who saw her to stone. Perseus, using Mercury’s winged sandals and Minerva’s shield, was able to kill her by looking at her reflection in the
shield. The Furies’ snakes (lines 40—42) anticipate the Medusa’s. The episode as
a whole is discussed in the note to lines 61-63. The Furies’ use of the term for
“concrete” is humorous.
54. we did ill . . . his attack: That is, we should have killed Theseus. According
to the myth, Theseus was imprisoned in Hades after Pirithous was killed by
Cerberus; Hercules rescued him (for the traditional Christian interpretation of

this story, see the note to line 98). In Aen. 6.392-97, Charon challenges Aeneas:

149

Inferno

Nec vero Alciden me sum laetatus euntem
accepisse lacu, nec Thesea Pirithoumque,
dis quamquam geniti atque invicti viribus essent.
Tartareum ille manu custodem in vincla petivit
ipsius a solio regis traxitque trementem;
hi dominam Ditis thalamo deducere adorti.
[Nor did I rejoice, when Alcides [Hercules]'went down,
to accept him on the lake, nor Theseus and Pirithous,

though they were begotten by gods and unvanquished in their strength.
The first sought out the watchdog with chains
and from the very threshold of the king dragged him up trembling;
the others were attempting to carry off Dis’s queen from his bed.]
55-60.

Turn around

... with his own

as well: That is, Virgil turns the

pilgrim to face away from the walls, has the pilgrim cover his eyes with his hands,
and places his own hands over the pilgrim’s. Since he is now facing away from
the Medusa, it is not clear what function (other than a purely symbolic one) the
multiple coverings (veilings) have (see the note to lines 61-63).
61-63.

O you... the strange verses: This is the second of the apostrophes

of the reader in the Inferno (see the note to 8.94). “The strange verses” most
probably refers to the entire episode, not merely to lines 52-62. There has been

considerable discussion of the nature of the danger represented by the Medusa.
The medieval commentators on Ovid interpret his Medusa as representing fear
so intense as to paralyze (they also preserve the interpretation that saw her as a
prostitute so beautiful she destroyed men). Dante’s commentators vary in their
interpretations. Boccaccio pointed out that the walls of Dis enclose the obstinate, hardened sinners who resist God’s efforts to convert them, and he saw the

Medusa as obstinate sensuality blind to spiritual matters, thus relating the episode to the recurrent theme of the difficulty of sight. Others see her as heresy
(Lana), terror, or despair (most fourteenth-century commentators).

A noteworthy modern interpretation is Freccero’s (1972), which calls attention to parallels with Dante’s rime petrose, especially with “Io son venuto al punto
de la rota” [I have come to the point on the wheel], and sees the danger as that
of a kind of erotic fixation on the literal surface of texts, as opposed to a spiritual
or allegorical view that sees beneath the veil (this is actually a version of
Boccaccio’s interpretation). In support of such a reading is the common metaphor of entering into or penetrating a text when understanding its “inner” meanings, often compared to entering a building; for instance, Augustine points out
that those who approach the Bible in pride, especially the Old Testament, cannot understand it, for they will not stoop (humble themselves) to enter its door
(Confessions 3.5.9; cf. 6.4ff.). The entire episode focuses sharply on the nature of
Dante’s poem as a text. Further discussion of the Medusa will be found in the
notes to 32.130—31, 33.55—57, and in Additional Note 15 (cf. Purgatorio 22).

150

Notes to Canto 9

64-72. And already ... beasts and shepherds flee: There are Vergilian
precedents for this magnificent simile, for instance, Aen. 2.416—-19 (describing
the destruction of Troy):

adversi rupto ceu quondam turbine venti
confligunt, Zephyrusque Notusque et laetus Eois
Eurus equis; stridunt silvae saevitque tridenti
spumeus atque imo Nereus ciet aequora fundo.

[as opposing winds breaking forth from a whirlwind
collide, west wind, south wind, and, with the horses
of the dawn, the east wind; the woods shriek and with his trident

Nereus rages and foaming urges the deeps to the very bottom.]
The early commentators point out the scientific accuracy of correlating the violence of a wind with the difference in temperatures of the contiguous air masses.
The thundering sound represents the approach of the messenger from Heaven
(line 85), though it strangely subsides when he becomes visible. It draws on the
account of the Harrowing of Hell in the Gospel of Nicodemus (see the note to
4.52—63), where the wind heralds the approach of Christ, reinforcing the parallel of the present episode with it.
73-74. Now direct your beam of sight: See the note to 4.11—-12, and compare lines 5-6.

76-78. Like frogs ... huddles on the bottom: See Ovid’s account of the
transformation of the churlish Lycians (Met. 6.370-81), especially lines 370-73:
iuvat esse sub undis
et modo tota cava submergere membra palude,

nunc proferre caput, summo modo gurgite nare,
saepe super ripam stagni consistere, saepe
in gelidos resilire lacus. . . .

[they enjoy being under the waves,
and now to submerge all their members in the deep pond,
now to put forth their heads, now their nostrils above the flood,
often they sit still on the bank of the pool, often
jump back into the freezing water. . . .]

See the note to 7.117—26, derived from the same passage.

81-85. one who was walking . . . he was sent from Heaven: The phrase
“sent from Heaven” is equivalent to “an angel from Heaven” (the Greek,
angelos, like the Hebrew

word it translates, is derived from the verb “to

151

Inferno

send”). Note the parallel here with Virgil’s reference to Christ in 4.53 (with note);
the brightness of the angel is dimmed both by the atmosphere of Hell and by the
pilgrim’s unreadiness to see it (on the gradual increase of the brightness of angels
in the Purgatorio, see Purg. 24.142—44, with notes). The angel’s walking on the
water recalls Christ’s doing so on the Sea of Galilee (Matt. 14.24—32), as well as

the figure of Mercury in Statius (Theb. 2.1—3), slowed by the thick air of Styx.
89. with a little wand: Because of the implications of the episode for Dante’s
theory of interpretation (see the note to lines 61-63), Freccero (1972) suggests
that the wand is meant to recall Mercury’s caduceus, Mercury being the patron
of hermeneutics and the pagan messenger of the gods.
94. Why do you kick back: This line echoes the words of Christ to Saul/
Paul at his conversion, “It is hard for you to kick [calcitrare] against the goad”
(Acts 9.5, cited also in Acts 26.14); the metaphor is of a horse or ox.

94-95. that Will whose ends can never be cut short: Compare Virgil’s
rebukes of Charon (3.94—96) and Minos (5.22—24).

97. fate: The messenger speaks classically: Latin fatum (plural, fata) means literally “what has been said” —that is, decreed.

98. Your Cerberus . . . because of it: A reference to Hercules’ chaining of
Cerberus (see the note to lines 52-54). Because of his preeminence among the
heroes as a benefactor of humanity, his descent to Hades to rescue Theseus, and

his apotheosis at death, Hercules was regarded in the Middle Ages as a chief mythic
parallel to Christ; thus in terms of Dante’s syncretism, always seeking to establish continuities between the classical and Christian worlds, this pagan reference

seems much less outlandish than it does to moderns; for a survey of the
Christological references to Hercules in the Inferno, see Miller 1984.
112-15. As at Arles . . . tombs variegate the place: The references are to
Roman cemeteries. According to a widespread legend, the tombs at Arles
miraculously enclosed the Christian dead after a great battle of Charlemagne’s
against the Muslims.

121. All their covers were lifted: The Italian is sospesi [suspended] (see the
note to 10.8—9).

125. arks: Cassell (1984) points out the implicit reference to Noah’s ark and
the iconography of baptism (see the note to 10.33).
127-28. Here are the chiefs of heresies: Heresy, the obstinate rejection of
all or part of orthodox Christian faith and the adherence to a separate group (thus
a tearing of the unity of the Church, often compared to Christ’s “tunica

152

Notes to Canto 9

inconsutilis” [seamless garment], John 19.23), was seen as distinct from schism,
which need not involve theological error, and from error itself, which need not

be willful or obstinate. It was regarded as both heinous and a major threat to the
Church and was vigorously investigated (the term “Inquisition” means “investigation”) and prosecuted, especially from the early thirteenth century on; the
Dominican order was founded expressly to combat it, and the Franciscans also

became prominent in the Inquisition. Heresy is not included in Virgil’s discussion of the arrangement of Hell in Canto 11, and its placement here, associated
with the unusual turn to the right in line 132, has occasioned discussion. We

discuss it in Additional Note 2.
132.

when he had turned to the right: As the commentators have noticed,

on only two occasions in Hell are Virgil and the pilgrim said to turn to the right
(here and at 17.31), but this instance is really unique, for in 17.31 there is of
course only one direction in which the two can descend. In association with the
walls of Dis, the turn may have been in part suggested by Aen. 6.540—43
(Grandgent):

Hic locus est partis ubi se via scindit in ambas:
dextera quae Ditis magni sub moenia tendit,
hac iter Elysium nobis; at laeva malorum
exercet poenas et ad impia Tartara mittit.

{Here is the place where the path splits in two directions:
the right one, which leads under the walls of great Dis,
will be our path to Elysium; but the left one punishes

the wicked and leads to the crimes of Tartarus.]
This is a version of the so-called Pythagorean choice: the left path leads downward; the right one, upward. Aeneas and the Sybil turn right outside the walls of
Dis: they may not enter, since in Vergil’s classical terms evil is simply to be
shunned. This turn of the pilgrim and Virgil inside the walls helps emphasize the
difference: the pilgrim must see evil in its entirety (see the notes to 30-51 and
8.82-117). See also 10.22—28, with note.

153

CANTO

10

Ora sen va per un secreto calle
tra ’] muro de la terra e li martiri
lo mio maestro, e io dopo le spalle.
“O virtu somma, che per li empi girl
mi volvi,” cominciai, “com’ a te piace,

10

13

parlami, e sodisfammi a’ miei disiri.
La gente che per li sepolcri giace
potrebbesi veder? gia son levati
tutt’ i coperchi, e nessun guardia face.”
E quelli a me: “Tutti saran serrati
quando di Iosafat qui torneranno
coi corpi che la su hanno lasciati.
Suo cimitero da questa parte hanno
con Epicuro tutti suoi seguaci,
che l’anima col corpo morta fanno.

16

1S

22,

205)

28

Pero a la dimanda che mi faci
quinc’ entro satisfatto sara tosto,
e al disio ancor che tu mi taci.”
E io: “Buon duca, non tegno riposto
a te mio cuor se non per dicer poco,
e tu m’hai non pur mo a cio disposto.”
“O Tosco che per la citta del foco
vivo ten vai cosi parlando onesto,
piacciati di restare in questo loco.
La tua loquela ti fa manifesto
di quella nobil patria natio
a la qual forse fui troppo molesto.”
Subitamente questo suono uscio
d’una de l’arche; pero m’accostai,
temendo, un poco piu al duca mio.

154

CANTO

10

The Epicureans—Farinata degli Uberti—Guelfs and Ghibellines—
prophecy of Dante’s exile—Cavalcante de’ Cavalcanti—Florentine
hatred of Farinata—foreknowledge of the damned

Now my master walks along a secret path,
between the wall of the city and the torments, and I
at his back.
“O highest power, who wheel me through the
wicked circles as you please,” I began, “speak to me
and satisfy my desires.
The people who are lying in the sepulchers, could
they be seen? for all the covers are lifted, and no one
is standing guard.”
And he to me: “All will be closed when from
Jehoshaphat they return with the bodies they left up
there.
Epicurus and his followers have their cemetery in
this part, who make the soul die with the body.
Therefore your request will soon be satisfied here
within, and also the desire you leave unspoken.”
And I: “Kind leader, I hide my heart from you
only in order to speak briefly, and you have so
inclined me, not only just now.”
22,

25

28

“O Tuscan who through the city of fire, alive, walk

along speaking so modestly, let it please you to stop
in this place.
Your speech makes you manifest as a native of
that noble fatherland to which perhaps I was too
harmful.”
Suddenly this sound came forth from one of the
arks; therefore I shrank, afraid, somewhat closer to

my leader.

155

Inferno

31

34

Sy

40

43

46

49

52

55

Ed el mi disse: “Volgiti! Che fai?
Vedi 1a Farinata che s’é dritto:
da la cintola in su tutto ’] vedrai.”
Io avea gia il mio viso nel suo fitto;
ed el s’ergea col petto e con la fronte
com’ avesse l’inferno a gran dispitto.
E l’animose man del duca e pronte
mi pinser tra le sepulture a lui,
dicendo: “Le parole tue sien conte.”
Com’ io al pié de la sua tomba fui,
guardommi un poco, e poi, quasi sdegnoso,
mi dimando: “Chi fuor li maggior tui?”
Io, ch’era d’ubidir disideroso,

non gliel celai, ma tutto gliel’ apersi;
ond’ ei levo le ciglia un poco in suso;
poi disse: “Fieramente furo avversi
a me e a miel primi e a mia parte,
si che per due fiate li dispersi.”
“S’e1 fur cacciati, ei tornar d’ogne parte,”

rispuos’ io lui, “luna e l’altra fiata;
ma 1 vostri non appreser ben quell’arte.”
Allor surse a la vista scoperchiata
un’ombra, lungo questa, infino al mento:
credo che s’era in ginocchie levata.
Dintorno mi guardo, come talento
avesse di veder s’altri era meco,

58

61

64

67

e poi che ’! sospecciar fu tutto spento,
piangendo disse: “Se per questo cieco
carcere vai per altezza d’ingegno,
mio figlio ov’ 6? e perché non é teco?”
E io a lui: “Da me stesso non vegno:
colui ch’attende la per qui mi mena
forse cui Guido vostro ebbe a disdegno.”
Le sue parole e ’l modo de la pena
m/’avean di costui gia letto il nome;
pero fu la risposta cosi piena.
Di subito drizzato grido: “Come
dicesti? ‘elli ebbe’? non viv’ elli ancora?

non fiere li occhi suoi il dolce lume?”
156

Canto 10

40

And he said: “Turn! What are you doing? See
there Farinata who has stood erect: from the waist up
you will see all of him.”
I had already fixed my eyes in his; and he was
rising up with his breast and forehead as if he had
Hell in great disdain.
And the spirited, quick hands of my leader
pushed me among the sepulchers toward him,
saying, “Let your words be counted.”
When I stood at the foot of his tomb, he gazed at

43

were your forebears?”
I, desiring to obey, did not hide it, but opened it

31

34

Sy

me a little, and then, as if scornful, asked me: “Who

all to him; and he raised his brows a little upwards;

46

49

then he said: “Fiercely were they opposed to me
and to my ancestors and to my party, so that twice |
scattered them.”
“If they were driven out, they returned from every

Sy

your people did not learn that art well.”
Then a shade rose up, discovered to sight as far as

side,” I replied, “the first time and the second; but

the chin, alongside the first one; I think it had risen

to its knees.
55

It looked around me, as anxious to see whether
another were with me, and after its peering was

58

61

64

67

entirely spent,
weeping it said: “If through this blind prison you
are going because of your high genius, where is my
son, and why is he not with you?”
And I to him: “I do not come on my own: he who
is waiting over there leads me through here, perhaps
to one your Guido had in disdain.”
His words and the manner of his punishment had
already read to me his name; therefore was my reply
so full.
Of a sudden risen to his feet, he cried: “How did

you say? ‘he had’? Is he no longer alive? Does the
sweet light no longer strike his eyes?”

157

Inferno
70

Quando s’accorse d’alcuna dimora

Us)

ch’io facéa dinanzi a la risposta,
supin ricadde e piu non parve fora.
Ma quell’altro magnanimo, a cui posta
restato m’era, non muto aspetto,
né mosse collo, né piego sua costa;

76

e sé continiiando al primo detto,

85

“S’elli han quell’arte,” disse, “male appresa,
cid mi tormenta piu che questo letto.
Ma non cinquanta volte fia raccesa
la faccia de la donna che qui regge,
che tu saprai quanto quell’arte pesa.
E se tu mai nel dolce mondo regge,
dimmi: perché quel popolo é si empio
incontr’ a’ miei in ciascuna sua legge?”
Ond’ io a lui: “Lo strazio e ’] grande scempio

88

tal orazion fa far nel nostro tempio.”
Poi ch’ebbe sospirando il capo mosso,

79

82

che fece |’Arbia colorata in rosso,

“A cio non fu’ io sol,” disse, “né certo

sanza cagion con li altri sarei mosso.
91

Ma fw’ io solo, la dove sofferto

fu per ciascun di torre via Fiorenza,
colui che la difesi a viso aperto.”
94

“Deh, se riposi mai vostra semenza,”

97

prega’ io lui, “solvetemi quel nodo
che qui ha ’nviluppata mia sentenza.
E] par che voi veggiate, se ben odo,

dinanzi quel che ’] tempo seco adduce,
100

e nel presente tenete altro modo.”
“Noi veggiam, come quei c’ha mala luce,
le cose,” disse, “che ne son lontano:

103

106

cotanto ancor ne splende il sommo duce.
Quando s’appressano 0 son, tutto é vano
nostro intelletto, e s’altri non ci apporta
nulla sapem di vostro stato umano.
Pero comprender puoi che tutta morta
fia nostra conoscenza da quel punto
che del futuro fia chiusa la porta.”
158

Canto 10

70

73

When he perceived a certain delay I made before
replying, he fell back supine and appeared no more
outside.
But that other great-souled one, at whose request I
had stopped, did not change his expression, nor
move his neck, nor bend his side;

76

712

82

85

but, resuming his earlier speech: “If they have
learned that art badly,” he said, “that torments me
more than this bed.
But not fifty times will be rekindled the face of the
lady who reigns here, before you will know how
much that art weighs.
And as you hope ever to return to the sweet
world, tell me: why is that people so cruel against
mine in all its laws?”
Therefore I to him: “The slaughter and the great
loss that stained the Arbia red, causes such orations

to be made in our temple.”
88

After he had moved his head, sighing, “In that I
was not alone,” he said, “nor certainly without cause

would I have moved with the others.
91

But I alone, there where all others would have
suffered Florence to be razed, was the one who

defended her openly.”
94

“Ah, so may your seed at some time rest,” I

begged him, “untie the knot that has entangled my
judgment here.
97

It seems that you see beforehand, if I hear well,
what time will bring, but in the present have a

100

103

106

different mode.”
“We see, as does one in bad light, the things,” he
said, “that are distant from us: so much the highest
Leader still shines for us.
When they approach or are present, our intellect
is utterly empty; and if another does not bring news,
we know nothing of your human state.
Thus you can comprehend that our knowledge
will be entirely dead from that point when the door
of the future will be closed.”
19

Inferno

109

ite,

Allor, come di mia colpa compunto,
dissi: “Or direte dunque a quel caduto
che ’] suo nato é co’ vivi ancor congiunto;
esi’ fui, dianzi, a la risposta muto,

fate i saper che ’] fei perché pensava
gia ne l’error che m’avete soluto.”
115

118

E gia ’] maestro mio mi richiamava;

per ch’i’ pregai lo spirto piu avaccio
che mi dicesse chi con lu’ istava.
Dissemi: “Qui con piu di mille giaccio:
qua dentro é ’] secondo Federico
e ’l Cardinale; e de li altri mi taccio.”

121

Indi s’ascose; e io inver’ l’antico

poeta volsi i passi, ripensando
a quel parlar che mi parea nemico.
124

127,

130

133

136

Elli si mosse; e€ poi, cosi andando

mi disse: “Perché se’ tu si smarrito?”
E io li sodisfeci al suo dimando.
“La mente tua conservi quel ch’udito
hai contra te,” mi comando quel saggio;
“e ora attendi qui,” e drizzo ’] dito:
“quando sarai dinanzi al dolce raggio
di quella il cui bell’ occhio tutto vede,
da lei saprai di tua vita il viaggio.”
Appresso mosse a man sinistra il piede;
lasciammo il muro e gimmo inver’ lo mezzo
per un sentier ch’a una valle fiede
che ’nfin la su facea spiacer suo lezzo.

160

Canto 10

109

112

DiS

118

121

124

127

130

133

136

Then, as if repentant of my fault, I said: “Now will
you tell that fallen one his son is still joined with the
living;
and if, earlier, I was silent before replying, make
him know that I did it because I was already
thinking in the error that you have untied for me.”
And already my master was calling me back;
therefore more hurriedly I begged the spirit to tell me
who was there with him.
He told me: “Here with more than a thousand I
lie: here within is the second Frederick and the
Cardinal; and of the others I do not speak.”
Then he hid himself; and I turned my steps
toward the ancient poet, thinking back on that speech
which seemed hostile to me.
He moved on; and then, walking, he said: “Why

are you so dismayed?” And I answered his question
fully.
“Let your memory preserve what you have heard
against you,” that sage commanded me; “and now
pay attention here,” and he raised his finger:
“when you are before her sweet ray whose lovely
eye sees all, from her you will know the journey of
your life.”
Then he moved his foot toward the left: we turned from
the wall and walked toward the center, along a path that
cuts straight to a valley
whose stench was displeasing even up there.

Sc

161

NOTES

1. secret path, between the wall . . . and the torments: Since Virgil and
the pilgrim have turned to the right, the wall is now to their right, the field of
sarcophagi to their left.
5. wheel me.
to 9.132).

. . as you please: A reference to the unusual turn (see the note

8-9. all the covers are lifted . . . standing guard: The open tombs and the
mention of guards introduce two prominent iconographic features of the Resurrection of Christ (levati [lifted] can also mean “removed”; in 9.121 the covers
are said to be “suspended”; the question of their position is probably resolved
by 11.6—7, which imply that they are leaning against the tombs). Dante is drawing a parallel between the pilgrim’s visit to the tomb and the visit of the Marys
to Christ’s tomb on Easter morning (Matt. 28.1—-8; Luke 24.1—10).
11. Jehoshaphat: The locale of the Last Judgment, according to the prophet
Joel (3.2 and 12).

14-15. Epicurus . . . make the soul die with the body: Although in Convivio
4.6 Dante included Epicurus among the noteworthy Greek philosophers, drawing on Cicero’s De finibus, here his attitude seems to be determined by Augustine’s
hostile discussions, to which Epicurus’s denial of immortality is central. That
those who deny immortality “make [fanno] the soul die” has a double sense: (1)
they assert that it dies, and (2) their adherence to that belief (against all reason
and authority, in Dante’s view; see Convivio 2.9) causes the death of their souls
(i.e., their damnation).

The categories that govern their presentation here are based largely on Saint
Paul’s denunciation of those who denied the Resurrection of Christ and partook unworthily of the Eucharist (1 Cor. 11 and 15.12-32), as interpreted by
Augustine, Sermo de scripturis 150: “Now if Christ be preached, that he arose again
from the dead, how do some among you say, that there is no resurrection of the
dead? But if there be no resurrection of the dead, then Christ is not risen again.
And if Christ be not nsen again, then is our preaching vain, and your faith also
is vain. . . . If (according to man) I fought with beasts at Ephesus, what doth it
profit me, if the dead rise not again? Let us eat and drink, for tomorrow we shall die
[1 Cor. 15.12-14, 32].” Augustine identifies the italicized sentence as the characteristic Epicurean attitude. In having the souls of the heretics buried in sarcophagi, Dante is drawing on Psalm 49 [Vulgate 48].11, “their sepulchres shall
be their houses forever.”

162

Notes to Canto 10

18. the desire you leave unspoken: Presumably the desire to see Florentines,
perhaps specifically Farinata (cf. 6.79).
19-21. I hide my heart . . . not only just now: As in 3.75-81, for example.

22-29. O Tuscan ... one of the arks: Since the pilgrim cannot see him,
Farinata must be behind him and to his left (as the damned are to Christ’s left;
references to the Last Judgment are particularly frequent in this canto; see 9.132).
His address identifies the pilgrim first as a Tuscan (Farinata’s larger allegiance),

then as a Florentine.
25. Your speech makes you manifest: A close translation of Matt. 26.73,
“Joquela tua manifestum te facit,” spoken to Peter, whose Galilean accent revealed

him as one of the followers ofJesus; in the verse that follows, Peter denies Christ
for the third time. For denial of the Resurrection as denial of Christ, see 1 Cor.
dilgarra'>:

32.

See there Farinata: Manente degli Uberti (ca. 1205-1264), called Farinata,
was, from 1239 until his death, the leader of the Florentine Ghibellines (repre-

senting principally the old military aristocracy); in 1248 they had driven the Guelfs
out of the city, only to be driven out themselves three years later. Farinata then
led a coalition of Tuscan Ghibellines against Florence, slaughtering them in a
bloody battle in 1260, on the plain of Montaperti, near Siena, crossed by the

river Arbia. A subsequent council of Ghibellines in Empoli proposed to raze
Florence, but Farinata’s single-handed opposition dissuaded them.
After Charles of Anjou defeated and killed King Manfred at Benevento in 1266,
a major disaster for the Ghibelline cause throughout Italy, an uprising in Florence
drove out the Ghibellines. Farinata’s descendants were explicitly excluded from
the attempted reconciliation of 1280, as they were from later amnesties. In 1283
the Franciscan inquisitor for Florence, fra Salamone da Lucca, posthumously
condemned Farinata and his wife as adherents to the heresy of the Paterines
(a branch of the Cathars); their bodies were exhumed and burned, their ashes
scattered on unhallowed ground.

33. from the waist up: In numerous respects the figure of Farinata alludes
ironically to a famous iconographic motif, the so-called Imago pietatis, showing
the dead Christ from the waist up, with bowed head, and hands crossed in front
of him; it has been shown to be a representation of the Real Presence of the
Body of Christ in the consecrated host (cf. the note to lines 14-15); thirteenthcentury efforts to combat heresy stressed the doctrine of transubstantiation as the
limit case of the testimony of faith against that of the senses. Farinata also recalls
the iconography of baptism, and the use of the term ark may remind the alert
reader that Noah’s ark was widely interpreted as a figure of baptism as well as of
the Church. For further discussion of this and other points in the notes on this
canto, see Mazzotta 1979, Cassell 1984, and Durling 1981b.

163

Inferno

34. fixed my eyes in his: The face-to-face confrontation of Farinata and
the pilgrim is another allusion to the Last Judgment (note also lines 8-12, 35-36,
106-8), when all will see Christ the Judge face to face (1 Cor. 13.12); the pilgrim obviously corresponds to Christ the Judge, in spite of Farinata’s
pretensions.
35-36. and
he was rising up...

in

great

disdain:
Dante’s de-

scription of
Farinata’s

imposing
figure, emPp hasizin &

Figure 2. The Resurrection ofthe dead. (Based on the central tympanum, west

breast

front, Amiens Cathedral)

and

forehead,

seats of the courage and foresight of a great leader (on his ““magnanimity,” see
the note to line 73), as well as pride and rebellion, forces us to entertain, if only
momentarily, the possibility of such a soul’s actually being superior to the sufferings of Hell. But the ironies with which Farinata is encompassed are manifold. Not the least is that in the iconography of the Resurrection the dead are
often represented as hearing the angelic trumpet and sitting up or standing up in
their tombs (Figure 2); Farinata’s and Cavalcante’s standing up in their tomb
abortively imitates this.
42. Who were your forebears: Farinata is still attached to the obsessive
political and class concerns of his life. Note that he uses the familiar tu to the
pilgrim.
46-48. Fiercely were they opposed to me... twice I scattered them:
Dante has Farinata grant Dante’s forebears a social status sufficiently close to his
own for them to be identifiable as direct opponents, but there is no mention of
them in the surviving lists of exiles. The scatterings referred to are those of 1248
and 1260. “Twice” translates Dante’s per due fiate (cf. Francesca’s use of the same
term in 5.130, with note).
49-51.

If they were driven out ... did not learn that art well: That is,

the pilgrim’s forebears returned from exile twice, but not Farinata’s people. The
pilgrim, too, is caught up in the old party animosity. Note his use of the term art
for returning from exile, a version of the traditional use of the term for politics
(cf. line 77). It is striking that the pilgrim answers both Farinata and Cavalcante
with the possessive derived from the respectful voi (cf. direte, line 110), accord-

164

Notes to Canto 10

ing to Florentine social usage. To only one other individual in Hell, Brunetto
Latini in Canto 15, does he use the respectful forms.
52-72. Then a shade rose up . . . appeared no more outside: The pilgrim must infer the identity of this shade (lines 64-66); Dante had evidently
never met him. It is Cavalcante de’ Cavalcanti (d. ca. 1280; Dante’s friendship
with his son Guido began ca. 1283), a leading Guelf, and, by Dante’s assertion
here (line 64), well known as a denier of the Resurrection. His son Guido (ca.
1255-1300) is Dante’s “first friend” (Vita nuova 25), and the leading Florentine

poet during Dante’s youth. As part of apeacemaking effort in 1266, Guido
had been betrothed to Farinata’s daughter Beatrice (calling attention to the
close family connections between members of opposing parties is part of Dante’s
commentary on Florentine civil dissension). After the riots of May 1300 (see
the note to 6.64—72), Dante, as one of the priors of the city, voted for Guido’s

relegation to Sarzana, where he became ill; in August the next group ofpriors
voted to allow him and others to return to Florence; he died that month. (The

fact that the pilgrim refers to Guido as still alive is an important indication that
the fictional date of the journey is April 1300.)
55-57. It looked ... entirely spent: As we soon learn, Cavalcante expects
to see his son. Although the pilgrim had to infer his identity, Cavalcante knows
who the pilgrim is and that he is Guido’s friend, perhaps by the foreknowledge
discussed in lines 97-108.
58. through this blind prison: The underworld. Cavalcante’s phrase echoes
Anchises’ description of life in the body, which infects the soul with its perturbations (Aen. 6.730-34):

Igneus est ollis vigor et caelestis origo
seminibus, quantum non noxia corpora tardant
terrenique hebetant artus moribundaque membra.
Hinc metuunt cupiuntque, dolent gaudentque, neque auras
dispiciunt clausae tenebris et carcere caeco.
[A fiery vigor is theirs and a heavenly origin
of those seeds, to the extent that their noxious bodies do not slow
or their earthly limbs and death-bound members weaken.
Thence they fear and desire, grieve and rejoice, nor do they see
the heavens, shut up in shadows and a blind prison.]

Ironically, Vergil’s lines fit Cavalcante, both during his life and now. Vergil’s
assertion that the body is the source of evil was vigorously criticized by the Church
fathers, who devoted much attention to his portrayal of the underworld; it was
central to the Gnostic tradition, including the Cathars.

165

Inferno

59. because of your high genius: As later passages make clear (especially Par.
17.124—42), the pilgrim’s poetic genius is indeed a reason for his journey. But
Cavalcante does not envisage the pilgrim’s being led by grace, supposing rather
that his journey expresses philosophical proficiency or loftiness of mind; his
question implicitly attributes competitiveness to the two friends.
61. I do not come on my own: The first part of the pilgrim’s reply singles out
the first part of the question: he is relying on higher powers, and he points to Virgil
as his guide. In his sermon on Acts 17.16—18 (referred to above), Augustine
identified the Epicureans and Stoics (who question Saint Paul in Athens) as the
philosophical sects of human self-sufficiency. Dante clearly has it in mind: Cavalcante
corresponds to the Epicureans, whom Augustine accuses of following fleshly
impulse, Farinata to the Stoics (because of his reliance on self-command and supe-

riority to suffering, as well as his concern with political action).

63. perhaps to one your Guido had in disdain: One of the most famous
cruxes in the poem, about which gallons of ink have been spilt. The Italian is
intentionally obscure; the main obscurities result from (1) the pronoun cui (translated “to one to whom”), which can mean “whom” or “to whom,” and whose

referent is debatable; (2) the verb ebbe [had], a past tense of the verb avere [to
have], which can mean “just now had,” “definitively had,” “once had,” or “no

longer has.” (All these possibilities, and others, have actually been advocated.)
Freccero (1988) has suggested that Dante is echoing Augustine’s “they disdain
[dedignantur] to learn from [Chnist]” (Confessions 7.21.27), said of the pride of
the Neoplatonists. Most critics have accepted the interpretation proposed by
Pagliaro ({1953] 1967): “he who is waiting over there is leading me to one to
whom your Guido disdained to come.” Most also have taken the view that
Dante is here asserting that Guido shared his father’s sin. While Dante is expressing misgivings about Guido, in our view he seems with this elaborately
obscure line to avoid saying anything definite about Guido’s ultimate fate (see
the note to lines 67-69).
67-69. How did you say? ‘he had’ .. . strike his eyes: Cavalcante takes
Dante’s obscure ebbe in the last of the senses listed in the note to line 63 under
(2): he thinks Guido no longer disdains, but in a negative sense, because he is no
longer alive (since Guido is still alive, as this mistake shows, “no longer disdains” may have a positive sense). The father’s questioning of the pilgrim in
these lines is strikingly parallel to God’s questioning of Cain about Abel in
Gen. 4.9-11: “Ubi est frater tuus?” [Where is your brother], “Quid fecisti?”
[What have you done]. The existence of an unresolved node of guilt and anxiety
connected with Guido is palpable (see the notes to Purg. 11.97—99 and Par.
13.133-42).

70-72. When he perceived . . . fell back supine: Cavalcante’s despair at the
idea of his son’s death is part of the punishment of one who saw nothing after

166

Notes to Canto 10

death. He falls supine as if struck by a blow on the forehead. His concern for his
son and his son’s fame, like Farinata’s concern for his descendants and his own

reputation, are for Dante instances of human beings’ universal concern for what
will happen after their deaths. Cavalcante is thus acting out impulses that should
have taught him that the soul is immortal, and his misinterpretations of the
pilgrim’s presence and of his ebbe are part of a system of negative misinterpretation of experience.

73. that other great-souled one: Dante’s term for “great-souled” is
magnanimo, a key term contrasting Farinata with Cavalcante’s pusillanimity. Scott
(1977) demonstrated the double-edged nature of this idea, with its background
in Aristotle’s Nichomachean Ethics; for the Middle Ages it can mean “overweening.” It thus has quite a different significance according to whether Farinata’s
worldly values or the pilgrim’s Christian ones are asserted.
79-81. not fifty times ... how much that art weighs: This is the second prophecy by a Florentine, this time foretelling Dante’s exile as a result of
the troubles predicted by the first (6.64-72). “The lady who reigns here” is
Hecate (in classical mythology the wife of Dis, also called Proserpina), com-

monly identified with the moon. Fifty months would take us to the summer
of 1304, just before the Whites were defeated in their effort to reenter Florence by force of arms (July). Dante had apparently repudiated them some
months before. Farinata’s prophecy is couched in the terms of the pilgrim’s
earlier speech (line 51).
83. why is that people so cruel against mine in all its laws: Legislation
against Farinata’s descendants continued to be passed in Florence (see the note
to lines 32-33).

85-87. The slaughter ... to be made in our temple: The slaughter of
Guelfs at Montaperti. “Our temple” has been identified with a number of
Florentine churches, where meetings of qualified voters were held. Orations
(orazioni) thus has two meanings: “speeches” and “prayers.”

88-93. After he had moved his head ... who defended her openly:
Farinata shakes or perhaps bows his head—his only movement in the entire
scene, perhaps acknowledging the depth ofhis suffering; it particularly focuses
the parallel with the Imago pietatis. Dante seems to be expressing a considerable complexity of attitude toward the historical Farinata—both dramatizing
the pride, rigidity, self-absorption, and intellectual/moral confusion involved
in turning against his homeland (and in his heresy), and suggesting that the
Florentine vengefulness, decades after the man’s death, was excessive. The

dialogue that began with party animosity has moved toward some degree of
mutual sympathy.

167

Inferno

97-108. It seems that you see . . . will be closed: What Farinata describes,
where events “distant” in the future are clear but those in the present or near
future are not seen, is a kind of inversion of the pattern of memory: events dis-

tant in the past are obscure, those in the present or near past are clear. The “bad
light” refers to twilight (perhaps moonlight: cf. Aen. 6.270: “quale per incertam
lunam, sub luce maligna” [because of an uncertain moon, under bad light]), when
distant things are outlined against the horizon. The “highest Leader” is God, or
more precisely the Logos, second person of the Trinity and principle of intellect, here compared to the sun (on the analogy, see the note on 1.17—18), and
referred to with the first of Cicero’s famous epithets for the sun, dux (Somnium

Scipionis 4.2). Farinata’s explanation may shed some light on the failure of Virgil’s
foreknowledge at the beginning of Canto 9.
107. that point when the door of the future will be closed: The end of
time. Dante, like Aquinas, believed that after the Last Judgment the turning
heavens would be immobilized. The moment of the ending of time is the furthest reference to the future made in the Inferno; it is striking that it should be

made by Farinata.
110-14. Now will you tell . . . you have untied for me: Note the contrast
between Cavalcante’s frantic jumping to negative conclusions and the pilgrim’s
careful inquiry into the cause of the misunderstanding; compare Eph. 4.14:
“Be no more children tossed to and fro and carried about with every wind of
doctrine.”

119. the second Frederick and the Cardinal: Frederick II of Hohenstaufen
(d. 1250), Holy Roman Emperor, called Stupor mundi [Wonder of the World],
who, although he passed severe laws against heresy, in the later part of his reign
was bitterly opposed by the popes and accused by the Guelfs of being an Epicurean and a mortalist; their animus against him was caused in part by the fact
that he maintained friendly diplomatic relations with Muslim rulers (he regained Jerusalem and other parts of the Holy Land by peaceful negotiation),
welcomed Muslim scientists and scholars to his court, and founded a city for
his Muslim subjects where they were permitted to practice their faith openly.
He was the author ofa noted treatise on falconry. “The Cardinal” is the proGhibelline Ottaviano degli Ubaldini (d. 1273), whom early commentators
report as having said, “If I have a soul, I have lost it a hundred times for the
Ghibellines.”
129.

he raised his finger: The timeless gesture of admonition, for Dante a

very emphatic one.
131. before her sweet ray: When face to face, not with Farinata (line 34),
but with Beatrice, whose eyes (emphasized in Virgil’s narrative, 2.55 and 116),

168

Notes to Canto 10

seeing all, contrast with the blindness of the Epicureans and will be a central
focus of attention when she appears in Purgatorio 29-33 and throughout the
Paradiso. But the pilgrim will in fact learn the details of his exile from his ancestor Cacciaguida (Par. 17.37—93).

169

CANTO™*

Il

In su l’estremita d’un’alta ripa
che facevan gran pietre rotte in cerchio,
venimmo sopra piu crudele stipa;
e quivi, per l’orribile soperchio
del puzzo che ’! profondo abisso gitta,
ci raccostammo, in dietro, ad un coperchio

d’un grand’ avello, ov’ io vidi una scritta

che dicea: “Anastasio papa guardo,
lo qual trasse Fotin de la via dritta.”
10

“Lo nostro scender conviene esser tardo,

si che s’ausi un poco in prima il senso
al tristo fiato; e poi no i fia riguardo.”
iS

Cosi ’] maestro; e io: “Alcun compenso,”

dissi lui, “trova che ’] tempo non passi
perduto.” Ed elli: “Vedi ch’a cio penso.”
16

19

22

25

28

“Figliuol mio, dentro da cotesti sassi,”

comincio poi a dir, “son tre cerchietti
di grado in grado, come que’ che lassi.
Tutti son pien di spirti maladetti;
ma perche poi ti basti pur la vista,
intendi come e perché son costretti.
D’ogne malizia, ch’odio in cielo acquista,
ingiuria é ’] fine, ed ogne fin cotale
o con forza o con frode altrui contrista.
Ma perché frode é de l’uom proprio male,
piu spiace a Dio; e pero stan di sotto
li frodolenti, e pit dolor li assale.
D’i violenti il primo cerchio é tutto;
ma perché si fa forza a tre persone,
in tre gironi é€ distinto e costrutto.

170

GANLOd

lal

Delay—the divisions of lower Hell: violence, fraud, treacheryp—
distinction between malice and incontinence—art/industry as Nature’s
child, God’s grandchild

At the edge of a high cliff, made by great rocks
broken in a circle, we came above a crueler crowding;

and there, because of the horrible excess of stench

10

IS

16

19

22

25

28

cast up by the abyss, we moved back beside the lid
of a great tomb, where I saw writing which said:
“IT hold Pope Anastasius, whom Photinus drew from
the straight way.”
“Our descent will have to be delayed, so that our
sense can become a little accustomed to the evil
smell; and then we can disregard it.”
So my master; and I to him: “Find something to
compensate, so that the time may not be lost.” And
he: “You see I am considering it.”
“My son, within these rocks,” he then began to
say, “are three smaller circles descending step by
step, like those you are leaving.
All are full of cursed spirits; but so that later the
mere sight of them may suffice, hear how they are
constricted and why.
Of every malice gaining the hatred of Heaven,
injustice is the goal, and every such goal injures
someone either with force or with fraud.
But because fraud is an evil proper to man, it is
more displeasing to God; and therefore the
fraudulent have a lower place and greater pain
assails them.
Of the violent the first circle is full; but because

violence can be directed against three persons, the
circle is divided and constructed in three subcircles.

171

Inferno
31

A Dio, a sé, al prossimo si pone
far forza, dico in loro e in lor cose,

34

come udirai con aperta ragione.
Morte per forza e ferute dogliose
nel prossimo si danno, e nel suo avere
ruine, incendi e tollette dannose;

37

40

43

onde omicide e ciascun che mal fiere,

guastatori e predon, tutti tormenta
lo giron primo per diverse schiere.
Puote omo avere in sé man violenta
e ne’ suoi beni; e pero nel secondo
giron convien che sanza pro si penta
qualunque priva sé del vostro mondo,
biscazza e fonde la sua facultade,

46

49

e piange la dov’ esser de’ giocondo.
Puossi far forza ne la deitade
col cor negando e bestemmiando quella,
e spregiando natura e sua bontade;
e pero lo minor giron suggella
del segno suo e Soddoma e Caorsa
e chi, spregiando Dio col cor, favella.

ay

55

58

La frode, ond’ ogne coscienza é morsa,
puo l’omo usare in colui che ’n lui fida
e in quel che fidanza non imborsa.
Questo modo di retro par ch’incida
pur lo vinco d’amor che fa natura;
onde nel cerchio secondo s’annida
ipocresia, lusinghe e chi affattura,
falsita, ladroneccio e simonia,
ruffian, baratti e simile lordura.

61

64

Per l’altro modo quell’amor s’oblia
che fa natura e quel ch’é poi aggiunto,
di che la fede spezial si cria;
onde nel cerchio minore, ov’ é ’] punto
de l’universo in su che Dite siede,

67

qualunque trade in etterno é consunto.”
E io: “Maestro, assai chiara procede
la tua ragione, e assai ben distingue
questo baratro e ’1 popol ch’e’ possiede.
172

Canto 11

ot

To God, to oneself, and to one’s neighbor one can
do violence, that is, to them and to their possessions,

34

as you will hear with clear reason.
Death by violence and painful wounds can be
inflicted on one’s neighbor, and on his possessions
ruin, fires, and wrongful extortion;

37

thus homicides and whoever wrongfully strikes,

spoilers, ard bandits, all are tormented in the first
40

43

46

49

subcircle in different groups.
One can turn a violent hand against oneself or
one’s own possessions; therefore in the second
subcircle each must uselessly repent
whoever deprives himself of your world, or utterly
squanders and undermines his wealth, and weeps
where he should be happy.
One can use force against the Deity by denying it
and cursing it in one’s heart or by scorning Nature
and its goodness;
and therefore the smallest subcircle stamps with
its seal Sodom and Cahors and whoever speaks with
scorn of God in his heart.

52

Fraud, which bites at every mind, a man can use

55

against one who trusts in him or against one who has
in his purse no cause for trust.
This latter mode seems to cut solely into the bond
of love that Nature makes; thus in the second circle

58

61

find their nest
hypocrisy, flattery, casters of spells, impersonators,
thievery and simony, panders, embezzlers, and
similar filth.
The former mode forgets the love that Nature
makes and also that which is added to it, from which

64

special trust is created;
thus in the smallest circle, at the point of the

67

is eternally consumed.”
And I: “Master, your reasoning proceeds most

universe where Dis is enthroned, whoever is a traitor

clearly and divides very well this pit and the people
it possesses.
173

Inferno

70

Ma dimmi: quei de la palude pingue,
che mena il vento, e che batte la pioggia,
e che s’incontran con si aspre lingue,

73

perché non dentro da la citta roggia
sono ei puniti, se Dio li ha in ira?
e se non li ha, perché sono a tal foggia?”’

76

Ed elli a me: “Perché tanto delira,”’

WO

disse, “lo ’ngegno tuo da quel che sole?
o ver la mente dove altrove mira?
Non ti rimembra di quelle parole
con le quai la tua Etica pertratta
le tre disposizion che ’] ciel non vole,

82

85

88

91

94

incontenenza, malizia e la matta

bestialitade? e come incontenenza
men Dio offende e men biasimo accatta?
Se tu riguardi ben questa sentenza
e rechiti a la mente chi son quelli
che su di fuor sostegnon penitenza,
tu vedrai ben perché da questi felli
sien dipartiti, e perché men crucciata
la divina vendetta li martelli.”
“O sol che sani ogne vista turbata,
tu mi contenti si quando tu solvi,
che, non men che saver, dubbiar m’aggrata.
Ancora in dietro un poco ti rivolvi,”
diss’ 10, “la dove di’ ch’usura offende

la divina bontade, e ’l groppo solvi.”
7,

“Filosofia,” mi disse, “a chi la ’ntende,

nota, non pure in una sola parte,
come natura lo suo corso prende
100

dal divino ’ntelletto e da sua arte;
e se tu ben la tua Fisica note,

tu troverai, non dopo molte carte,
103

106

che l’arte vostra quella, quanto pote,
segue, come ’| maestro fa ’] discente;
si che vostr’ arte a Dio quasi é nepote.
Da queste due, se tu ti rechi a mente
lo Genesi dal principio, convene
prender sua vita e avanzar la gente;
174

Canto 11

70

But tell me: those of the greasy swamp, those
driven by the wind and beaten by the rain, and those
who collide with such harsh words,

73

76

12

why are they not punished inside the ruddy city,
if they are under God’s wrath? and if not, why are
they treated so?”
And he to me: “Why does your wit,” he said, “so
wander from its usual course? or where does your
mind gaze mistaken?
Do you not remember the words with which your
Ethics treats so fully the three dispositions that
Heaven refuses,

82

85

88

91

94

97

incontinence, malice, and mad bestiality? and how

incontinence offends God less and acquires less
blame?
If you consider this judgment well and bring to
mind who those are that undergo their penitence
higher up and outside,
you will see clearly why they are separated from
these wicked ones and why God’s justice hammers
them less wrathfully.”
“O sun that heals every clouded sight, you content
me so when you resolve questions, that doubting is no
less pleasurable than knowing.
Turn back a little yet again,” I said, “to where you
say that usury offends God’s goodness, and untie
that knot.”
“Philosophy,” he said, “to one who understands it,
notes, and not merely in one place, how Nature takes

100

103

106

its course
from the divine intellect and art; and if you take
good note of your Physics, you will see, after not

many pages,
that your art follows Nature as much as it can, as
a disciple follows the master; so that your art is
almost God’s grandchild.
From these two, if you bring to mind the
beginning of Genesis, we must draw our life and
advance our people;
i
WeS

Inferno

109

112

115

e perché l’usuriere altra via tene,
per sé natura e per la sua seguace
dispregia, poi ch’ in altro pon la spene.
Ma seguimi oramai, che ’] gir mi piace;

ché i Pesci guizzan su per l’orizzonta,
e ’] Carro tutto sovra ’] Coro giace,
e ’| balzo via la oltra si dismonta.”

176

Canto 11

109

and because the usurer holds another way, he
scorns Nature in herself and in her follower, since he

puts his hope in something else.
112

115

But follow me now, for I desire to go; the Fishes

are wriggling up over the horizon, and the Wain lies
entirely above the northwest wind,
and it is far to the place where we must climb
down this bank.”

a”

177

ING) LES

4. excess of stench: This is the “stench of sinners” (foetor peccatorum) and “stench
of evil” (foetor mali) of the Visio Pauli, which also requires caution on approach
(Silverstein 1937; the idea is also scriptural [e.g., Prov. 10.7]). See also Virgil’s
Aen. 6.201: “fauces grave olentis Averni” [the jaws of evil-smelling Avernus];
also 6.239—42.
7. writing: The first inscription since that on Hellgate in Canto 3, and the last
in Hell. Canto 11, like Canto 3, is one of transition.

8-9. Pope Anastasius... the straight way: Identification of these figures is
uncertain (perhaps intentionally so), particularly since the syntax is ambiguous:
either Anastasio or Fotin could be either the subject or the object of the verb. In
both cases the heresies are early ones and concern the divinity of Chnst. Dante’s
names here form a series of ironic puns: Anastasius, “the resurrected,” in a tomb;

Photinus, “the little light” of error.

16-111. My son, within these rocks ... his hope in something else:
Dante now puts in Virgil’s mouth an explanation of the structure of Hell as a
whole and the classification of sins on which it is based: first (lines 16—66), he
discusses three of the four circles of lower Hell, enclosed within the walls of the
city of Dis, those of violence, simple fraud, and treacherous fraud, after first es-

tablishing that they are all for sins of malice; then, in answer to the pilgrim’s first
question (lines 67—75), he accounts for the circles they passed through before
reaching the walls (lines 76-90); finally, in answer to the pilgrim’s second question (lines 91-96), he clarifies a particular point, the classification of usury (lines
97-111). Virgil’s account is incomplete (it omits the neutrals, Limbo, and her-

esy [the first circle inside the walls]; however, of these only the last is subject to
Minos) and perhaps in some respects inconsistent (see the notes to lines 76-90).
Kirkham (1992) suggests that the medieval interpretation of the number eleven
as signifying transgression (it “goes beyond” the perfect number, ten) helps explain the placing of this explanation (Virgil’s lesson, she notes, concludes at 11.111;
Ch Leda):
22-24. Of every malice . . . injures someone: Virgil first asserts the distinguishing characteristic of lower Hell: malice, the express purpose (“the goal’’) of
which is to act contrary to the law (iniuria, from ius, law) and consequently (since
the purpose of the law is to ensure that all are treated justly) to inflict harm. Virgil
does not distinguish here between God’s law and natural law or human law; many
of his distinctions are drawn from Roman law, broadly understood (cf. Digest

47.10).

178

Notes to Canto 11

24. either with force or with fraud: This is to be understood as an exhaustive classification; it, too, is derived from Roman law (Institutes 4.4.2).
25-27. But because fraud ... greater pain assails them: Fraud is more
displeasing to God than violence because it involves corruption of what is more
distinctive of man, his intellect (cf. Convivio 3.2.14—19; that violence is shared

with the beasts is implied here). It should be noted that in Dante’s view the devil
also practices fraud and that Virgil’s words “proper to man,” if taken to mean
“exclusive to man,” are mistaken (Cantos 21—23 suggest that Virgil in fact does
not understand the nature of the devils).
28-51.

Of the violent ... scorn of God in his heart: The circle of the

violent is divided into three subcircles corresponding to the person injured: God,
oneself, or one’s neighbor. The conception derives from Matt. 22.37—40 (cf.

Mark 12.29-39):

Jesus said to him: Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with thy whole heart,
and with thy whole soul, and with thy whole mind. This is the greatest
and the first commandment. And the second is like to this: Thou shalt
love thy neighbor as thyself: On these two commandments dependeth the
whole law and the prophets.

The theologians interpreted this order as quite logical: it is natural to love God
first, as one’s origin and the source of all value, and it is more natural to love

oneself than to love others (cf. Aquinas, Summa theol. 2a 2ae, q. 118). Thus the
sequence of increasing gravity of violence against others or their possessions (least
serious, because in a sense more natural, lines 34—39), oneself and one’s possessions

(lines 40—45), and God and his possessions (lines 46—51). That acts of violence
against possessions are ranked according to the possessor is ultimately derived
from Roman law (see the entries under iniuria in Digest 4.10.21).
It should be remembered that in the Neoplatonic tradition accepted by medieval Christianity love is also the bond that unites the entire cosmos with its golden
chain. An important text for Dante is Book 2, metrum 8 of Boethius’s Consola-

tion, especially lines 13-30 (on love, cf. Chaucer’s Knight’s Tale, 2987-93):
Hanc rerum seriem ligat
terras ac pelagus regens
et caelo imperitans amor.
Hic si frena remiserit,

quidquid nunc amat invicem
bellum continuo gerens,
et quam nunc socia fide
pulchris motibus incitant,
certent solvere machinam.

179

Inferno

[Love binds this series of things,
ruling the lands and the sea,
commanding from the heavens.
If love released the reins,
all things that now love mutually,

suddenly waging war,
this fabric of things which
now with mutual trust
they drive in lovely motions,
they would strive to dissolve.]
The chain of love, with the closely associated “great chain of being,” is implicit
even in Hell, in the notion of its concentric circles (cf. those of the planets) and

in that of descent by degrees.
40-45. One can turn ... where he should be happy: The squanderers
punished here are clearly to be distinguished from the spendthrifts of Canto 7 as
being expressly self-destructive rather than simply uncontrolled (see lines 72, 82—
84). Line 45 would seem to refer to the squanderers rather than the suicides.
46-51.

One

can use force ... in his heart: “Sodom”

refers to sodomy;

“Cahors,” from a city in southern France noted for its moneylenders, refers to
usury. The idea that blasphemy, sodomy, and usury offend God more than murder
derives partly from the ordering of persons noted in lines 31—33, but it rests also
on a notable shift in the meaning of the term violence as applied to these sins, and
in the relation between possessor and things possessed. Perhaps in no other aspect of the Inferno is the distance so pronounced between Dante’s medieval conceptions, on the one hand, and, on the other, modern or even Greek (Aristote-

lian) ones. The Christian condemnation of homosexuality as against nature stems
largely from Saint Paul (Rom. 1.26—27), but of course goes back to the Old
Testament (see the note to 14.8—-39). For associating sodomy and usury with
violence against God, see Aquinas, Summa theol. 2a 2ae, q. 154, a. 12: “in sins

against nature, in which the very order of nature is violated, an injury is done to
God himself, who sets nature in order.”

Identification of the sin of Sodom has generated much discussion. A number
of critics have argued that Dante is condemning other sins under this name; the
most prominent are Pézard (1950), for whom the sin is preferring a foreign language to one’s mother tongue, and Kay (1978b), who offers a great wealth of
material on the complexity of the idea of Sodom for the Middle Ages, arguing
that here the sin is opposition to the Holy Roman Empire. The traditional, and
the majority view, which we share, is that “Sodom” here refers to homosexuality. See Additional Notes 4 and 5.

49-50. stamps with its seal: For the metaphor, probably one of coining, see
the note to lines 55-56.

180

Notes to Canto 11

51. scorn of God in his heart: Ps. 13.1, 52.1: “The fool says in his heart:
there is no God.”
52-66. Fraud ... eternally consumed: Fraud against God would be impossible, given his omniscience; only fraud against others is explicitly classified,
and it is again divided according to the persons injured: those who have a special reason to trust their deceiver (treacherous fraud), and those who do not (simple
fraud). For the metaphor of coin for trust, see next note.

55-56. This latter mode. . . that Nature makes: That is, simple fraud does
not violate a bond of special trust between individuals, but only the natural bond
of love between human beings. It is on this bond that the possibility of civil society
rests, and therefore even simple fraud weakens society itself, as implied by Dante’s
term incida (“cuts into,” not “severs”). Compare Aquinas, Summa theol. 2a 2ae,
q. 109, a. 3: “One must say that because man is a social animal, by nature each
man owes to the other that without which human society cannot be preserved.
For men cannot associate with each other unless they believe they are telling
each other the truth.” In this light the coin metaphor of line 54 itself raises the
issue of the social significance of fraud. The perversity of the city of Dis as a city
is subjected to particularly detailed analysis in the Malebolge (see next note).
57-60. in the second circle ... and similar filth: The Malebolge [Evil
pouches], described in Cantos 18-30, is the second of the three lower circles
mentioned in line 17, subdivided into ten concentric ditches or “pouches.” Virgil
is far from exhaustive and names occupants of only eight of the ten “pouches.”
57. find their nest: Nesting animals include both vermin and reptiles; Dante
refers to Florence as a “nest of so much malice” in 15.78.
61-66. The former mode... eternally consumed: “The former mode”
refers to lines 53-54 and is correlated with “this latter mode” of line 55. Thus
“the smallest,” the third circle, Cocytus (accented on the second syllable), punishes those who, forgetting both the natural bond among men and also the particular bonds of love that join them to individuals, deceive persons who have
reason to trust them. The additive principle (traitors break both bonds, the general and the special) also holds, in the lowest reaches of Hell, for the relation of

violence and fraud: Dante’s traitors are all, directly or indirectly, murderers.
64-65. the point of the universe: In Dante’s cosmos, this is the deepest point,
where the weight of the entire universe impinges.
70-75. those of the greasy swamp . .. treated so: The pilgrim lists, but not
in order, the sinners of Cantos 5-8. These, Virgil will explain, are the sins of incontinence; Dante associates them with material elements (swamp, wind, rain, and stone,

or earth). This was traditional: the different personality types were explained by the
predominance of one or another humor in the body, and the humors (phlegm,

181

Inferno
blood, bile, and black bile) were associated with the four elements and the four
qualities (wet, dry, hot, and cold). (See also Vergil, Aen. 6.730—43, on the infection

of the body and the cycle of reincarnation.) If we accept Russo’s (1967) explanation of the sins punished in the Styx (see the note to 7.123), it is easy to see why a
number of the early commentators considered that all seven deadly vices (seen as
passions to which the sinners gave way) are punished in the circles of incontinence.
76-90. Why does your wit ... less wrathfully: Virgil explains that those
outside the city sinned by incontinence rather than “malice” or “mad bestiality.” For the concept see Aquinas, In Ethica Nichomachea 7.8 (1151a12-13):
“whereas the incontinent still judges rightly about what he should do or avoid,
and only his passions are astray, in the intemperate man reason itself is perverted:
he approves of his corrupt desires.” Virgil introduces here the Aristotelian concept of disposition, the habit or inner inclination toward bad (or good) actions,

acquired through repetition. The earlier discussion (lines 22-24) classified sins
according to the intention (“the goal,” line 23) of acting unjustly, the mode or
means, and the direct result. Now the emphasis shifts to include the habitual state
of the sinner, whether expressed in his sin or the result of his sin.
76. wander: Boccaccio explains that Dante’s verb for “wander” here, delirare,

means literally “to depart from the furrow that is being plowed.”
80. your Ethics: Aristotle’s Nichomachean Ethics, which the pilgrim has evidently
studied.
81-83. the three dispositions . . . mad bestiality: “Bestiality” is a new term
in Virgil’s discussion, and there has been disagreement about its reference. Most

critics take it to refer to the circle of violence, especially to those violent against
others; support for this view is offered by the frequency of references in Canto 12
to the bestiality of anger. But this seems inconsistent with lines 22-24: would the
tendency to violence be distinct from malice? Others (led by Mazzoni 1953, 1986)
point out that Virgil’s words draw on a passage in the Nichomachean Ethics, where
Aristotle (who of course says nothing about God’s displeasure with sin) distinguishes
three “moral states to be avoided . . . vice [somewhat inaccurately translated in the
Middle Ages as malitia], incontinence, brutishness.” By “brutishness,” as a later
chapter (1148b15—1150a8) makes somewhat clearer, Aristotle means the extremes
of cruelty “beyond the limits of vice [that is, the customary vices of civilized Greeks]”
(1149a1); most of his examples of “brutishness” involve cannibalism. Since cannibalism is an explicit feature of Cocytus, this view argues that in these lines “incontinence”’ refers to the sins punished outside the city, “malice” to all sins punished
within the city (violence and both types of fraud), and “mad bestiality” only to the
sin of Cocytus (treacherous fraud). Both views involve overlapping categories.
87. penitence: Not of course in any profitable sense; the term here means
“undergoing of punishment” (Latin poenitentia, from poena, punishment).

182

Notes to Canto 11

91-96. O sun ... untie that knot: The pilgrim’s second question asks why
usury is condemned. He does not question the condemnation of sodomy or ask
to have it explained (a fact that supports the majority view); for the analogy
between usury and sodomy, see the note to lines 110-11.
96. untie that knot: Treating a problem as a knot is traditional. There may
also be a hint here of usurious debt as a bond, the opposite of the “bond of nature” that usury offends.
97-111. Philosophy . . . in something else: Virgil explains that usurers evade
God’s decree (Gen. 3.17—19): “In the sweat of thy face shalt thou eat bread” (Luke
6.35 was another important text often cited against charging interest on loans). Nature
(in the Middle Ages the term usually refers to the influence of the heavenly bodies)
is God’s art (cf. Monarchia 1.3.2) because it carries out his creative plan and fashions
the sublunar. Nature is thus analogous to a human craftsman (the analogy is spelled
out in Par. 2.112—32) and the model for all human making (Aristotle, Physics 2.2:
“art follows nature insofar as it can”). “Your art” is thus metaphorically the child of
Nature, the child of God. “Philosophy” here, as in 6.106, refers to the current
Aristotelianism, for which the concept of a beneficent—and “reasonable” —Nature

was crucial. For further discussion of these concepts, see Monarchia 2.2.3.
106. From these two: That is, from Nature and industry (art).

110-11.

he scorns Nature ... in her follower: The usurer scorns both

Nature and art. The third circle of violence, then, holds those who scorn God

directly (the blasphemers), those who scorn Nature directly and thus God indirectly (the homosexuals), and those who scorn Nature indirectly and God doubly
indirectly (the usurers). Like the usurers, the sodomites evade a divine commandment, to “be fruitful and multiply” (Gen. 1.22), not dissimilar, in Dante’s view,
from the injunction to productive work. In the traditional Greek terminology
for interest paid to moneylenders, it was called tdékos [offspring]; Aristotle
considered it unnatural that coin should breed or beget money (Politics 1.10.1258b);
cf. Aquinas’s commentary: “thus a kind of birth occurs when money grows from
money. For this reason this acquisition of money is especially contrary to Nature.”

112-114. the Fishes ... the northwest wind: It is April, and the sun is in
Aries: if the Fish, which form the preceding constellation, are just rising, and
the Wain, or Big Dipper, is in the direction of the northwest wind (Corus), then
it is a few hours before sunrise, about 4:00 a.m. As in the case of Canto 7, Virgil’s

concluding his discourse with an indication of time according to the positions
of the stars suggests his “inner eye” is fixed on the circlings of the heavens, the
model of rationality and order.

183

CANTO"“1?

Era lo loco ov’ a scender la riva
venimmo alpestro e, per quel che v’er’ anco,
tal ch’ogne vista ne sarebbe schiva.
Qual é quella ruina che nel fianco
di qua da Trento |’Adice percosse,
O per tremoto o per sostegno manco,
che da cima del monte, onde si mosse,

10

al piano é si la roccia discoscesa
ch’alcuna via darebbe a chi st fosse:
cotal di quel burrato era la scesa;
e ’n su la punta de la rotta lacca
Yinfamia di Creti era distesa

13

che fu concetta ne la falsa vacca;
e quando vide noi, sé stesso morse,

16

il)

si come quei cui l’ira dentro fiacca.
Lo savio mio duca inver’ lui grido: “Forse
tu credi che qui sia ’] duca d’Atene,
che su nel mondo la morte ti porse?
Partiti, bestia, ché questi non vene
ammaestrato da la tua sorella,

22

25

ma vassi per veder le vostre pene.”
Qual é quel toro che si slaccia in quella
c’ha ricevuto gia ’l colpo mortale,
che gir non sa, ma qua e 1a saltella:
vid’ io lo Minotauro far cotale;

e quello accorto grido: “Corri al varco;
mentre ch’e’ ’nfuria, é buon che tu ti cale.”’
28

Cosi prendemmo via git per lo scarco
di quelle pietre, che spesso moviensi
sotto i miei piedi per lo novo carco.

184

CANTO

12

Seventh circle: the violent—descent of the landslide—the earthquake at
Christ’s death—first subcircle: the violent against others—the
centaurs—the river of blood

The place where we came to descend the bank
was mountainous, and, because of what else was

there, such that every sight would shun it.
Like that landslide which struck the flank of the
Adige this side of Trento, because of an earthquake
or the failing of support,
where from the summit of the mountain, whence

they fell, down to the plain, the rocks lie so strewn
that they would provide a path for one who was
above:
10

such was the descent into that valley; and at the

very point where the slope had broken, the infamy of
Crete was stretched out,
13

the one conceived in the false cow; and when he

16

saw us, he bit himself like one broken within by
anger.
My wise one shouted toward him: “Perhaps you
believe the duke of Athens is here, who put you to
death up in the world?

19

Away, beast, for this man does not come taught

22

by your sister, but goes to see your punishments.”
Like a bull that wrenches free at the moment it
has received the mortal blow, that is unable to walk

but jumps here and there,
25

so I saw the Minotaur do; and that alert one cried:

28

“Run to the crossing; it is good to go down while he
is in his fit.”
So we took our way down along that scree, and
the stones kept moving under my feet, because of
their new burden.

185

Inferno

31

34

SH

Io gia pensando; e quei disse: “Tu pensi
forse a questa ruina, ch’é guardata
da quell’ira bestial ch’i’ ora spensi.
Or vo’ che sappi che I’altra fiata
ch’i’ discesi qua git nel basso inferno,
questa roccia non era ancor cascata.
Ma certo poco pria, se ben discerno,
che venisse colui che la gran preda
levo a Dite del cerchio superno,

40

da tutte parti l’alta valle feda
tremo si ch’i’ pensai che l’universo
sentisse amor, per lo qual é chi creda

43

46

49

52

piu volte il mondo in cadsso converso;
e in quel punto questa vecchia roccia,
qui e altrove, tal fece riverso.
Ma ficca li occhi a valle, ché s’approccia
la riviera del sangue in la qual bolle
qual che per violenza in altrui noccia.”
Oh cieca cupidigia e ira folle,
che si ci sproni ne la vita corta,
e ne l’etterna poi si mal c’immolle!
Io vidi un’ampia fossa in arco torta,
come quella che tutto ’] piano abbraccia,
secondo ch’avea detto la mia scorta;

55

e tra ’] pie de la ripa ed essa, in traccia
corrien centauri, armati di saette,

58

61

come solien nel mondo andare a caccia.
Yeggendoci calar, ciascun ristette,
e de la schiera tre si dipartiro
con archi e asticciuole prima elette;
e l’un grido da lungi: “A qual martiro
venite voi che scendete la costa?
Ditel costinci; se non, l’arco tiro.”

64

67

Lo mio maestro disse: “La risposta
farem noi a Chirdn costa di presso:
mal fu la voglia tua sempre si tosta.”
Poi mi tento, e disse: “Quelli é Nesso,
che mori per la bella Deianira
e fé di sé la vendetta elli stesso.
186

Canto 12

31

34

27/

I walked thoughtful; and he said: “You are
thinking perhaps of this landslide, guarded by that
bestial anger I just now put out.
Now I would have you know that the other time I
came down here into lower Hell, this cliff had not yet
fallen.
But certainly, if | remember well, a little before he

came who took from Dis the great spoils of the

40

highest circle,
on every side this deep, foul valley trembled so
that I thought the universe must be feeling love, by
which, some believe,

43

the world has often been turned back into chaos:
and at that point this ancient cliff, here and

elsewhere, was broken down.
46

49

But probe the valley with your sight, for we are
approaching the river of blood, in which are boiling
those who harm others with violence.”
Oh blind cupidity and mad rage, that so spur us
in this short life, and then in the eternal one cook us

52

so evilly!
I saw an ample, curving ditch that embraces the
entire plain, according to what my guide had said;

55

and between the foot of the cliff and it, centaurs

58

were running in file, armed with arrows, as they
used to go hunting in the world.
Seeing us come down, each stopped, and from the
file three came forth with bows and with arrows they
had selected first;

61

64

and one cried from afar: “To what punishment do
you come, you who are climbing down the bank?
Speak from there; otherwise I draw my bow.”
My master said: “The reply will we make to
Chiron, close over there; to your harm has your will

67

always been so hasty.”
Then he nudged me and said: “That is Nessus,
who died because of fair Deianira and himself
avenged himself.

187

Inferno

70

E quel di mezzo, ch’al petto si mira,

é il gran Chiron, il qual nodri Achille;

quell’altro é Folo, che fu si pien d’ira.
73

76

79

82

Dintorno al fosso vanno a mille a mille,

saettando qual anima si svelle
del sangue pit che sua colpa sortille.”
Noi ci appressammo a quelle fiere isnelle;
Chiron prese uno strale, e con la cocca
fece la barba in dietro a le mascelle.
Quando s’ebbe scoperta la gran bocca,
disse a’ compagni: “Siete voi accorti
che quel di retro move cio ch’el tocca?
Cosi non soglion far li pié d’i morti.”
E ’] mio buon duca, che gia li er’ al petto,
dove le due nature son consorti,

85

rispuose: “Ben € vivo, e si soletto
mostrar li mi convien la valle buia;
necessita ’] ci ’nduce, e non diletto.

88

Tal si parti da cantare alleluia
che mi commise quest’officio novo;

non é ladron, né io anima fuia.
91

94

97

Ma per quella virtu per cu’ io movo
li passi miei per si selvaggia strada,
danne un de’ tuoi a cui noi siamo a provo
e che ne mostri 1a dove si guada;
e che porti costui in su la groppa,
ché non é spirto che per l’aere vada.”
Chiron si volse in su la destra poppa,
e disse a Nesso: “Torna, e si li guida,

103

e fa cansar s’altra schiera v’intoppa.”
Or ci movemmo con la scorta fida
lungo la proda del bollor vermiglio,
dove 1 bolliti facieno alte strida.
Io vidi gente sotto infino al ciglio;

106

e ’] gran centauro disse: “E’ son tiranni
che dier nel sangue e ne l’aver di piglio.
Quivi si piangon li spietati danni;

100

quivi é Alessandro, e Dionisio fero,

che fe Cicilia aver dolorosi anni.
188

Canto 12

70

73

76

The one in the middle, who is gazing at his breast,

is the great Chiron, who brought up Achilles; that
other is Pholus, who was so full of anger.
Around the ditch they go by thousands, shooting
with arrows whatever soul emerges from the blood
more than his guilt allots.”
We drew near those swift beasts: Chiron took an
arrow, and with the notch he moved his beard back

io)

82

from his jaw.
When he had uncovered his great mouth, he said
to his companions: “Have you noticed that the one
behind moves what he touches?
The feet of the dead usually do not so.” And my
good leader, who already stood at his breast, where

the two natures are wedded,
85

88

on

94

97

100

103

106

replied: “He is indeed alive; and thus alone I must
show him the dark valley; necessity induces us, and
not pleasure.
One left off singing hallelujah who entrusted me
with this strange task: he is not a robber nor I a
thievish soul.
But by that Power through which I move my steps
along so wild a road, give us one of yours to guide
us
and show us where the ford is, and carry this one
on his rump, for he is not a spirit that can walk upon
theair-”
Chiron turned on his right breast, and said to
Nessus: “Go back and guide them, and, if you meet
another company, make them give way.”
Now we go with our trusty escort along the bank
of the red boiling, where the boiled ones were
uttering high shrieks.
I saw people immersed as far as the brow; and the
great centaur said: “They are tyrants who put their
hands to blood and to others’ goods.
There they weep for their pitiless crimes: there is
Alexander and fierce Dionysius, who gave Sicily such
grievous years.
189

Inferno

109

112

115

E quella fronte c’ha ’] pel cosi nero
é Azzolino; e quell’altro ch’é biondo
é Opizzo da Esti, il qual per vero
fu spento dal figliastro su nel mondo.”
Allor mi volsi al poeta, e quei disse:
“Questi ti sia or primo, e io secondo.”
Poco piu oltre il centauro s’affisse
sovr’ una gente che ’nfino a la gola
parea che di quel bulicame uscisse.

118

121

Mostrocci un’ombra da |’un canto sola,

dicendo: “Colui fesse in grembo a Dio
lo cor che ’n su Tamisi ancor si cola.”
Poi vidi gente che di fuor del nio
tenean la testa e ancor tutto ’1 casso;

124

127

130

133

136

e di costoro assai riconobb’ io.
Cosi a piu a piu si facea basso
quel sangue, si che cocea pur li piedi;
e quindi fu del fosso il nostro passo.
“Si come tu da questa parte vedi
lo bulicame che sempre si scema,”
disse ’] centauro, “voglio che tu credi
che da quest’altra a piu a piu giu prema
lo fondo suo, infin ch’el si raggiunge
ove la tirannia convien che gema.
La divina giustizia di qua punge
quell’ Attila che fu flagello in terra,
e Pirro e Sesto; e in etterno munge
le lagrime che col bollor diserra
a Rinier da Cometo, a Rinier Pazzo,

139

che fecero a le strade tanta guerra.”
Poi si rivolse e ripassossi ’] guazzo.

190

Canto 12

109

And that forehead with such black hair is
Azzolino; and that other blond one is Obizzo da Este,

i

inky

118

who truly
was murdered by his bastard up in the world.”
Then I turned to my poet, and he said: “Let him now
be first for you, and I second.”
A little further along, the centaur stopped above
people who seemed to emerge from the boiling
stream as far as the throat.
He pointed to a soul by itself to one side, saying:
“That one cleft, in the bosom of God, the heart that

121

still drips blood along the Thames.”
Then I saw people who held their heads out of the
river and then all their trunks; and of them I

recognized many.
124

127

Thus the blood became shallower and shallower,

until it was cooking only feet; and there was our
passing of the ditch.
“Just as on this side you see the boiling stream
diminish,” said the centaur, “I would have you

130

133

believe
that on this other side it lowers its bed deeper and
deeper, until it reaches the depth where tyranny
must moan.
Over there God’s justice pierces that Attila who
was a scourge on earth, and Pyrrhus and Sextus, and

136

for eternity milks
the tears unlocked by the boiling from Rinier da
Corneto and Rinier Pazzo, who waged such war on

139

the roads.”
Then he turned and passed back over the ford.

as

191

NOTES

2. what else was there: This phrase is explained in lines 11-14.
4-9. Like that landslide .

. who was above: The landslide makes it pos-

sible for one to climb down to the foot of the mountain (see the note to 31—

45). As the commentators have shown, this passage follows closely one in
Albertus Magnus’s Meteorologica (3.6) describing the famous Slavini di Marco,
south of Rovereto, between Trento and Verona, which can in fact be descended

on foot.
12. the infamy of Crete: The Minotaur—half-bull, half-man—is stretched
out across the path. Pasiphaé, wife of King Minos of Crete (cf. 5.4, with note),

fell in love with a white bull, with which she copulated disguised in a wooden
cow built by Daedalus, the great inventor and artist. She gave birth to the
Minotaur, for whom Minos had Daedalus build the labyrinth (in which he also

imprisoned Daedalus). Defeated in war by the Cretans, the Athenians gave a yearly
tribute of youths and maidens, supposedly devoured by the monster, until Theseus
(9.54, with note), helped by Ariadne, penetrated the labyrinth and slew the
Minotaur.
Dante knew this widely commented-upon myth mainly from Ovid (Art of
Love 2.1—32; Met. 8.152—82) and Vergil (Aen. 6.14—33). Vergil relates that after
his escape with the wax-and-feather wings, during which he lost his son Icarus
(cf. Inf. 17.109-11), Daedalus built the temple to Apollo at Cumae, where the

Sybil was priestess, and represented these events on its gate. Vergil thus establishes a parallel, which did not escape Dante, between the Cretan labyrinth, and
Aeneas’s path through the underworld and wanderings between Troy and Italy
(Doob 1990). Like the centaurs, whom we meet later, the Minotaur represents

the problematic union of rational and animal in human beings. For other myths
about Crete, see 14.94—120, with notes.

15. like one broken within by anger: Note the parallels of phrasing with
the passage on Plutus (7.9 and 14) and the self-biting anger of Filippo Argenti
(8.62-63).
17. duke of Athens: In the wake of the Old French Roman de Thébes (which
retells the events of Statius’s Thebaid), Theseus is frequently identified as the duke,
rather than the king, of Athens (in the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries Athens was in fact a dukedom).

20. your sister: Ariadne, daughter of Minos and Pasiphaé (see the note to
line 12).

192

Notes to Canto 12

22-25. Like a bull ... the Minotaur do: Compare the famous simile in
Aen. 2.222-24:
qualis mugitus, fugit cum saucius aram
taurus et incertam excussit cervice securim.

[such bellowing, as when the wounded bull flees the altar

and shakes from his neck the uncertain axe.]
Compare also Seneca, Oedipus 342-43:
taurus duos
perpessus ictus huc et huc dubius ruit
[a bull, enduring two
blows, rushes half-conscious here and there]
The vivid touch of the bull hopping on four legs perhaps implies that Dante
imagines the Minotaur as having the body of a bull and the head of a man (perhaps also a human breast, like the centaurs) rather than a human body and bull’s
head, as in most of the representations in ancient art (not available to Dante).

Ovid's “semibovemque virum semivirumque bovem” [both a man half-bull and
a bull half-man] (Art of Love 2.24) is ambiguous.
29-30. the stones kept moving . . . new burden: Again note the emphasis
on the novelty of the presence of the pilgrim’s body (as in 8.27 and 30). There
is the suggestion that Virgil’s next comments are prompted by its presence.
31-45. You are thinking perhaps . . . broken down: Virgil now explains
that the landslide happened just before the Harrowing of Hell (lines 37-39; cf.
4.52-73); Virgil is apparently unable to make the connection with the death of
Christ (Matt. 27.45—51):
Now from the sixth hour there was darkness over the whole earth,

until the ninth hour. . . . And Jesus again crying with a loud voice,
yielded up the ghost. And behold the veil of the temple was rent in
two from the top even to the bottom, and the earth quaked, and
the rocks were rent.

The explanation applies, of course, to all the landslides in Hell, and now it becomes
clear that the damned shriek and curse God as they pass the one in 5.34 because it
reminds them of the redemption from which they are excluded, Singleton (1965)
pointed out (see also 11.1, 23.133-38). The great landslide, like its explanation, is
appropniate to the circle of violence: for Dante the Crucifixion was the worst act
of violence ever committed, and the union of rational and animal nature in man is

implicitly related to the union of the divine and human natures in Christ. On the
landslides providing the pilgrim’s path, see Additional Note 16.

193

Inferno

41-43. I thought the universe . . . into chaos: Another moment of remarkable insight on the part of Virgil. The traditional explanation of the darkening
of the sun and the earthquake at Christ’s death (Matt. 27.45, 51) was that both
Heaven and Hell testified that he was the Creator who had died (Jerome, cited
in Aquinas,

Catena aurea; in Super Matthaeum, Albertus Magnus writes, “at

[Christ’s] cry so many signs appeared because the entire universe exclaimed that
it could not endure that death”; in his commentary on Sacrobosco, Michael Scot

recorded the tradition that the universe felt compassion). That Virgil’s true insight into the cause of the earthquake is lost when he refers it to Empedocles’
doctrine and thus discredits it, is probably another clue to his fate (see 8.128—30,
9.1-15, with notes). Empedocles (mentioned in 4.138), according to Aristotle

(e.g., Physics 1.4—5), held that the universe alternates between a phase when strife
predominates, driving things apart, and one when love draws things together,
back toward the original chaos.

47. the river of blood: Clearly to be connected, in the body analogy (see
Additional Note 2), with the great blood vessels surrounding the heart (the explicit
comparison of the bloodstream with a river is frequent in Aristotle and other
writers known to Dante); the association of irascible temperament with the
element of fire in the blood is ancient. As Virgil will later explain (14.134—35),
this is the river Phlegethon (Aen. 6.550—51; cf. 8.19 with note). The river of fire
or blood is also a standard element of the popular traditions of the other world
(Morgan 1990). Dante seems to have got the idea of correlating degree of
immersion with seriousness of sin from the Visio Pauli or one of its descendants,

perhaps through Vincent of Beauvais, where it is the punishment of tyrants
(Silverstein 1937).

49-51. Oh blind cupidity ... cook us so evilly: Greed and anger are
thus identified as the chief motives leading to violence; both are implicitly compared with fire in the metaphor of spurs and cooking. The spurs also introduce the horse metaphor: comparing the interaction of the rational with the
irascible-appetitive and that of ahuman being with a horse goes back to antiquity; in Plato (Phaedrus 246—48) the rational soul is a charioteer with two
horses; in medieval versions (e.g., Queste del saint Graal, pp. 91-92) it is a
mounted knight. Dante uses the metaphor frequently (e.g., Convivio 4.17.4;

Monarchia 3.15.9); it underlies his entire treatment in the Purgatorio (see Purg.
16.85—96, with notes).

56. centaurs: Dante knew of the centaurs—half-man, half-horse—mainly from
his poets and the mythographers. Unlike the other guardians of Hell, his centaurs seem not to be conceived as demons; they are apparently exempt from the
punishment of the violent, though they were traditionally portrayed as being

194

Notes to Canto 12

so. In addition to the myths mentioned below, the centaurs were famous for
having attempted to carry off the bride and other women from the wedding of
Theseus’s friend Pirithous; the resulting fight—interpreted as rationality versus
bestiality (see previous note)—was a favorite subject of Greek art and a main
focus of Ovid’s Metamorphoses, Book 12.
The centaurs inevitably suggest the figure of the mounted warrior (the early
commentators compare them to the mounted mercenaries frequent in Italy); the
ancients speculated that the myth originally derived from the surprise of those
who first saw mounted invaders from Thessaly (where the centaurs were said to
originate).

67-69. That is Nessus . . . avenged himself: According to the myth, after
agreeing to carry Hercules’ wife Deianira across the river Euenus, Nessus attempted to carry her off; Hercules killed him with an arrow dipped in the blood
of the fire-breathing Lernaean Hydra. Dying, Nessus told Deianira that his shirt,
dipped in his blood, would be an infallible love charm. Years later, hoping to
regain his love, Deianira sent Hercules the shirt, which consumed his flesh.

Hercules built and lit his own funeral pyre; his human part was purged away,
and he became a god (cf. 9.98 and note).

71. Chiron: The wisest of the centaurs, especially learned in medicine, music,
and astronomy, said to have been the teacher of both Hercules and Achilles
(Statius, Achilleid, Book 1), and to have become the constellation Sagittarius at
his death.

72. Pholus: Referred to by Vergil (Georgics 2.256), Ovid (Met. 12.306), and
Lucan (Pharsalia 6.391) as particularly violent.

83-84.

his breast, where the two natures are wedded: Where man leaves

off and horse begins. In human beings the locus of the union of rational and
animal being, according to Aristotle, is the breast, for he believed that the soul,

with all its powers, dwells in the heart (see the note to 13.37-39); mind and

passion meet and struggle there. Chiron’s gaze would seem to refer to the wisdom about his double nature that enables him to rule.

85-96. He is indeed alive ... upon the air: Virgil’s appeal to Chiron is
quite different from the harsh peremptory replies to Charon, Minos, and Plutus.
The assumption seems to be that Chiron and the centaurs are not at war with
God, “that Power” in line 91 (apparently indicated also in the fact that in line
119 Nessus mentions God).

19S

Inferno

88. One left off singing hallelujah: The reference is of course to Beatrice in
Canto 2. Dante would have known that the Hebrew hallelujah [praise God]
included one of the names of God.

97-99. Chiron . . . give way: The choice of Nessus as a guide is perhaps meant
to emphasize the contrast between the centaurs, who are now guided by the
rational Chiron in spite of their violence in life, and the souls being punished
here. He is now a “trusty escort” for them, though he was not for Deianira.
104. tyrants: Dante glosses the term tyrant in the Monarchia (3.4.10) as referring to “those who attempt to twist the laws not to the common good but their
own.

”?

107. Alexander and fierce Dionysius: Probably Alexander the Great (third
century B.c.) and Dionysius the tyrant of Syracuse (d. 397 B.c.), both of whom
Dante’s sources (Valerius Maximus, Paulus Orosius, and Brunetto Latini) iden-

tify as especially bloodthirsty.
110. Azzolino: Or Ezzelino III da Romano, lord of Treviso (d. 1259), head
of the northern Ghibellines, called a son of the devil because of his cruelty (see
Par. 9.25—63, with notes).

111-12. Obizzo da Este ... up in the world: Obizzo II da Este, lord of
Ferrara (d. 1293), a notoriously cruel ruler, was rumored to have been murdered

by his son and successor Azzo VIII, whose illegitimacy Dante here apparently
asserts (though figliastro may also mean “degenerate son’).
119-20.

That one cleft ... drips blood along the Thames: The refer-

ence is to Guy of Montfort’s murder of Henry of Cornwall, a cousin of Edward
I of England, in Viterbo in 1271. The murder took place in church, during the

assembly of cardinals to choose a pope. Si cola, translated here “drips blood,” is
uncertain; it may mean “is venerated.” The first, stronger meaning would be a
commentary on the fact that the murder, committed in the presence of the kings

of France and of Naples, was never avenged or punished.
119. in the bosom of God: Nessus is one of the few speakers in Hell who
refer to God without periphrasis (see the notes to lines 85-96).

134. Attila who was a scourge: Attila the Hun (d. a.p. 453), popularly called
the “scourge of God,” whom Dante erroneously credits with the destruction of
Florence (13.148-49).
135. Pyrrhus . . . Sextus: “Pyrrhus” is probably the king of Epirus (third century B.c.), a compulsive fighter who gave his name to any victory so bloody for

196

Notes to Canto 12

the victor as to constitute a defeat; or it may be Achilles’ son, who kills King

Priam in Aen. 2.526—58. “Sextus” is probably Sextus Pompeius, son of Pompey
the Great (see the note to 9.22—27), a pirate, denounced by Lucan (6.419-22).
137. Rinier da Corneto . . . Rinier Pazzo: Notorious highwaymen of the
thirteenth century, active respectively in southern and northern Tuscany. The
name Pazzo means “crazy.”

197

Non era ancor di la Nesso arrivato,
quando noi ci mettemmo per un bosco
che da neun sentiero era segnato.
Non fronda verde, ma di color fosco,
non rami schietti, ma nodosi e ’nvolti,
non pomi v’eran, ma stecchi con tosco.

10

13

16

Non han si aspri sterpi né si folti
quelle fiere selvagge che ’n odio hanno
tra Cécina e Corneto i luoghi colti.
Quivi le brutte Arpie lor nidi fanno,
che cacciar de le Strofade i Troiani
con tristo annunzio di futuro danno.
Ali hanno late, e colli e visi umani,

pié con artigli, e pennuto ’] gran ventre;
fanno lamenti in su li alberi strani.
E ’] buon maestro “Prima che piu entre,
sappi che se’ nel secondo girone,”
mi comincio a dire, “e sarai mentre

19

Pipe

25

28

che tu verrai ne l’orribil sabbione.
Pero riguarda ben; si vederai
cose che torrien fede al mio sermone.”
Io sentia d’ogne parte trarre guai
e non vedea persona che ’I facesse,
per ch’io tutto smarrito m/’arrestai.
Cred’ io ch’ei credette ch’io credesse
che tante voci uscisser, tra quei bronchi,

da gente che per noi si nascondesse.
Pero disse ’] maestro: “Se tu tronchi
qualche fraschetta d’una d’este piante,
li pensier c’hai si faran tutti monchi.”
198

CANTO

13

Seventh circle, second subcircle: the violent against themselves—the
poisoned wood—Pier della Vigna—the chase ofprodigals—the
anonymous Florentine

Not yet had Nessus reached the other side, when
we entered a wood that no path marked.
Not green leaves, but dark in color, not smooth
branches, but knotted and twisted, no fruit was there,

10

13

but thorns with poison.
Not such harsh thickets nor so dense do those
wild beasts hold, that hate the cultivated places
between Cécina and Corneto.
There the ugly Harpies make their nests, who
drove the Trojans from the Strophades with dire
prophecy of their future woe.
Their wings are broad, their necks and faces
human, their feet have claws, and their great bellies

16

are feathered; they utter laments on the strange trees.
And my good master: “Before you enter, know
that you are in the second subcircle,” he began to say,

19

Dap

25

“and will be until
you come to the horrible sands. Therefore look
carefully; and you will see things that would
make you disbelieve my speech.”
I heard cries of woe on every side but saw no
person uttering them, so that all dismayed I stood
still.
My belief is that he believed that I must believe
that so many voices, among those thickets, came

28

forth from people hidden from us.
Therefore my master said: “If you break off some
little twig from one of these plants, the thoughts you
have will all be cut off.”

199

eae
Sil

Allor porsi la mano un poco avante
e colsi un ramicel da un gran pruno;

34

37

40

43

e ’] tronco suo grido: “Perché mi schiante?”
Da che fatto fu poi di sangue bruno,
ricomincio a dir: “Perché mi scerpi?
non hai tu spirto di pietade alcuno?
Uomini fummo, e or siam fatti sterpi:
ben dovrebb’ esser la tua man piu pia
se state fossimo anime di serpi.”
Come d’un stizzo verde ch’arso sia
da l’un de’ capi, che da l’altro geme
e cigola per vento che va via:
si de la scheggia rotta usciva insieme
parole e sangue, ond’io lasciai la cima
cadere, e stetti come l’uom che teme.

46

“S’elli avesse potuto creder prima,”
rispuose ’] savio mio, “anima lesa,
cid c’ha veduto pur con la mia rima,

49

non averebbe in te la man distesa;

ma la cosa incredibile mi fece
indurlo ad ovra ch’a me stesso pesa.
52

Ma dilli chi tu fosti, si che ’n vece

d’alcun’ ammenda tua fama rinfreschi
nel mondo su, dove tornar li lece.”
55

58

E ’] tronco: “Si col dolce dir m’adeschi
ch’i’ non posso tacere; e voi non gravi
perch’ io un poco a ragionar m’inveschi.
Io son colui che tenni ambo le chiavi
del cor di Federigo e che le volsi,
serrando e diserrando, si soavi

61

che dal secreto suo quasi ogn’uom tolsi;
fede portai al glorioso offizio,
tanto ch’i’ ne perde’ li sonni e ’ polsi.

64

La meretrice che mai da I’ospizio
di Cesare non torse li occhi putti,
morte comune e de le corti vizio,

67

infiammo contra me li animi tutti;

e li ’nfiammati infiammar si Augusto
che ’ lieti onor tornaro in tristi lutti.
200

Canto 13

31

34

37

40
43

46

49

52

55

58

61

64

Then I stretched out my hand a little before me
and plucked a small branch from a great thornbush;
and its stem cried out: “Why do you split me?”
When it had become dark with blood, it began
again: “Why do you pluck me? Have you no spirit of
pity at all?
We were men, and now we have become plants:
truly your hand should be more merciful had we
been the souls of serpents.”
As when a green log is burnt at one end, from the
other it drips and sputters as air escapes:
so from the broken stump came forth words and
blood together, and I let the tip fall and stood like
one afraid.
“If he could have believed first,” replied my sage,
“O wounded soul, what he has seen only in my
rhymes,
he would not have stretched out his hand against
you; but the incredible thing made me induce him to
do what pains me as well.
But tell him who you were, so that as a kind of
amends he may refresh your fame in the world
above, where he is permitted to return.”
And the branch: “You so tempt me with sweet
speech that I cannot be silent, and let it not vex you
that I am lured to speak a little.
I am he who held both the keys to the heart of
Frederick and turned them, locking and unlocking, so
gently
that I excluded almost everyone else from his
intimacy; I kept faith with my glorious office, so
much that because of it I lost sleep and vigor.
The whore who never turns her sluttish eyes away
from Caesar’s dwelling, the common death and vice of
courts,

67

inflamed against me all spirits; and those inflamed
inflamed Augustus so that my bright honors turned
to sad mourning.

201

Inferno

70

73

76

79

L’animo mio, per disdegnoso gusto,
credendo col morir fuggir disdegno,
ingiusto fece me contra me giusto.
Per le nove radici d’esto legno
vi giuro che gia mai non ruppi fede
al mio segnor, che fu d’onor si degno.
E se di voi alcun nel mondo riede,

conforti la memoria mia, che giace
ancor del colpo che ’nvidia le diede.”
Un poco attese, e poi: “Da ch’el si tace,”
disse ’] poeta a me, “non perder l’ora;

82

ma parla, e chiedi a lui, se piu ti piace.”
Ond’ io a lui: “Domandal tu ancora
di quel che credi ch’a me satisfaccia;
ch’i’ non potrei, tanta pieta m’accora.”

85

88

Percio ricomincio: “Se l’om ti faccia
liberamente cid che ’| tuo dir priega,
spirito incarcerato, ancor ti piaccia
di dirne come I’anima si lega
in questi nocchi; e dinne, se tu puoi,

91

94

97

s’alcuna mai di tai membra si spiega.”
Allor soffio il tronco forte, e poi
si converti quel vento in cotal voce:
“Brievemente sara risposto a voi.
Quando si parte |’anima feroce
dal corpo ond’ ella stessa s’é disvelta,
Minos la manda a la settima foce.
Cade in la selva, e non l’é parte scelta,
ma la dove fortuna la balestra,

100

103

quivi germoglia come gran di spelta.
Surge in vermena e in pianta silvestra;
l’Arpie, pascendo poi de le sue foglie,
fanno dolore e al dolor fenestra.
Come laltre verrem per nostre spoglie,
ma non pero ch’alcuna sen rivesta,

ché non é giusto aver cio ch’om si toglie.
106

Qui le strascineremo, e per la mesta
selva saranno 1 nostri corpi appesi,

ciascuno al prun de l’ombra sua molesta.”
202

Canto 13

70

73

76

79

My spirit, at the taste of disdain, believing by
death to flee disdain, made me unjust against my just
self.
By the strange new roots of this wood, I swear to
you that I never broke faith with my lord, who was
so worthy of honor.
And if either of you goes back to the world,
strengthen my memory, languishing still beneath the
blow that envy dealt it.”
My poet waited a little, and then, “Now that he is
silent,” he said, “do not lose the moment, but speak,

82

85

88

91

94

question him further if you will.”
And I to him: “You ask him again about what you
think will satisfy me; for I could not, so much pity
weighs on my heart.”
Therefore he began again: “So may one do
liberally for you what your speech has begged,
imprisoned spirit, let it please you still
to tell us how the soul is bound in these knots;

and tell us, if you can, if anyone ever unties himself
from such limbs.”
The broken branch hissed loudly, and then that
wind was converted into these words: “Briefly will
you be answered.
When the fierce soul departs from the body from
which it has uprooted itself, Minos sends it to the

97

100

103

106

seventh mouth.
It falls into the wood, and no place is assigned to
it, but where chance hurls it, there it sprouts like a
grain of spelt.
It grows into a shoot, then a woody plant; the
Harpies, feeding on its leaves, give it pain and a
window for the pain.
Like the others, we will come for our remains, but

not so that any may put them on again, for it is not
just to have what one has taken from oneself.
Here we will drag them, and through the sad
wood our corpses will hang, each on the thornbush
of the soul that harmed it.”
203

Inferno

Noi eravamo ancora al tronco attesi,

credendo ch’altro ne volesse dire,
112

quando noi fummo d’un romor sorpresi:
similemente a colui che venire
sente ’] porco e la caccia a sua posta,
ch’ode le bestie, e le frasche stormire.

115

Ed ecco due da la sinistra costa,

nudi e graffiati, fuggendo si forte
che de la selva rompieno ogne rosta.
118

121

124

127

130

133

136

139

142

145

Quel dinanzi: “Or accorri, accorri, morte!”

E l’altro, cui pareva tardar troppo,
gridava: “Lano, si non furo accorte
le gambe tue a le giostre dal Toppo!”
E poi che forse li fallia la lena,
di sé e d’un cespuglio fece un groppo.
Di retro a loro era la selva piena
di nere cagne, bramose e correnti
come veltri ch’uscisser di catena.
In quel che s’appiatto miser li denti,
e quel dilaceraro a brano a brano;
poi sen portar quelle membra dolenti.
Presemi allor la mia scorta per mano,
e€ menommi al cespuglio che piangea
per le rotture sanguinenti in vano.
“O Iacopo,” dicea, “da Santo Andrea,

che t’é giovato di me fare schermo?
che colpa ho io de la tua vita rea?”
Quando ’] maestro fu sovr’ esso fermo,
disse: “Chi fosti, che per tante punte
soffi con sangue doloroso sermo?”
Ed elli a noi: “O anime che giunte
siete a veder lo strazio disonesto
c’ha le mie fronde si da me disgiunte,
raccoglietele al pié del tristo cesto.
I’ fui de la citta che nel Batista
muto ’l primo padrone, ond’ ei per questo
sempre con l’arte sua la fara trista.
E se non fosse che ’n sul passo d’Arno
rimane ancor di lui alcuna vista,

204

Canto 13

109

We were still attentive to the broken branch,

112

believing it had more to say, when we were
surprised by a noise:
like one who hears the boar and the hunt
approaching his post, who hears the beasts, and the
branches breaking.

115

And behold two on our left, naked and scratched,

118

fleeing so fast that they were breaking every
opposing branch in the forest.
The one in front: “Now hurry, hurry, death!” And
the other, who seemed to himself too slow, “Lano,

121

124

i

130

Ie

136

139

not so nimble were
your legs at the jousts at Toppo!” And perhaps
because his breath was failing, he made one clump of
himself and a bush.
Behind them the wood was full of black bitches,

ravenous and running like greyhounds loosed from
the chain.
They set their teeth to the one that had squatted,
tearing him to pieces, bit by bit; then they carried off
those suffering members.
My guide then took me by the hand and led me
to the bush that wept through its bleeding wounds in
vain.
“O Tacopo,” it was saying, “di Santo Andrea, what

did it profit you to make a shield of me? how am I to
blame for your wicked life?”
When my master stopped above it, he said: “Who
were you, who through so many splintered branches
puff out with blood your sad speech?”
And he to us: “O souls who have arrived to see
the shameful rending that has so divided my leaves
from me,

142

gather them together at the foot of my sad shrub.
I was from the city that for the Baptist changed its

first patron, who for this
145

with his art will always grieve it. And were it not
that at the crossing of Arno there still remains some
trace of him,
205

Inferno

148

que’ cittadin che poi la rifondarno
sovra ’1 cener che d’Attila rimase,

avrebber fatto lavorare indarno.

15%

Io fei gibetto a me de le mie case.”

206

Canto 13

148
151

those citizens who refounded it upon the ashes
left by Attila, would have labored in vain.
I made a gibbet for myself of my houses.”

Oe

NOTES

1-9. Not yet . . . Corneto: Dante begins each of the first three tercets of the
canto with a negative, as well as each line of the middle tercet; compare the use
of anaphora in the inscription of 3.1—9 and in Francesca’s speech in 5.100—108.
1. the other side: Of the river of blood, traversed in 12.126.

3-6. a wood ... thorns with poison: The only vegetation in Hell, this
trackless wood recalls that of Canto 1. The unnatural forest is a commonplace
of ancient accounts of the approaches to Hades; compare Seneca, Hercules 689,
698-702 (Gmelin); Lucan, Pharsalia 3.400—414; and Statius, Theb. 4.419-—42

(cf. 7.2463).
9. Cécina and Corneto: The Cécina, a stream in Tuscany, and the hamlet of
Corneto Tarquinia, in Latium, were on the boundaries of the Maremma, a

swampy area, rich with wild animals, in west-central Italy.
10-12. Harpies . . . future woe: The Strophades are small islands in the Ionian
sea. In the Aeneid, the Harpies befoul the meal of the Trojan exiles and predict
that they will one day have to eat their plates; the prophecy is fulfilled harmlessly (Aen. 3.210—57 and 7.111—34). The Harpies are described at Aen. 3.216—
18, 225-28:
Virginei volucrum voltus, foedissima ventris

proluvies uncaeque manus et pallida semper
Ora fame:..:
At subitae horrifico lapsu de montibus adsunt
Harpyiae et magnis quatiunt clangoribus alas
diripiuntque dapes contactuque omnia foedant
immundo, tum vox taetrum dira inter odorem.

[The birds’ faces are girlish, disgusting is the
flow of their bellies, their hands are claws and
always pale are their faces with hunger. . . .
Suddenly in terrifying descent from the mountains
the Harpies arrive and noisily shake their great wings;
they tear at the food, and with their filthy touch all is

polluted, then the dire voice is heard over the foul smell.]

208

Notes to Canto 13

15. laments on the strange trees: As the commentators have pointed out,
the adjective strani [strange] can modify either lamenti [laments] or alberi [trees].
Benvenuto pointed out that both alternatives make sense; the ambiguity is probably intended.
17. you are in the second subcircle: That of the suicides. Dante draws both
on classical views about suicide and on Christian ones stemming from Saint
Ambrose and Saint Augustine. Plato’s Socrates argues that suicide is like a soldier’s
leaving his post in battle without an order from his commander (Phaedo 62); the
Judeo-Chnistian condemnation of suicide follows from the commandment “Thou
shalt not kill” (Ex. 20.13), a view developed by Augustine in a rigorous critique
of the Stoic and Epicurean theory of suicide as permissible or even noble (City
of God 1.17). See also the notes to lines 72, 73-75.
21. things that would make you disbelieve my speech: They would not
be believable if I were to relate them. This line begins a series of references to
the theme of trust and belief in the canto.

25-27. My belief... hidden from us: The mannered triple construction,
which coordinates the narrating poet’s awareness of Virgil’s awareness of the
pilgrim, distributed over several tenses and distinct moods of the verb (present,
simple past, and imperfect subjunctive), has excited much comment. De Sanctis

and his followers saw it as alluding to the highly mannered style of Pier delle
Vigne’s Latin epistles; later views (Spitzer 1942) see these and the other contortions of the language of the canto as expressive of the problematic of suicide (see the notes to lines 70—72). We see this passage as one of several devices expressing the tension between the living (thus, integrated) Dante and
the suicides, who violently destroy the unity of soul and body. The lines render the pilgrim’s hesitation and puzzlement as well as pointing to the special,
sometimes telepathic relation he shares with Virgil (for another example, see
23.21—22, with notes).

26. voices, among those thickets: The scene suggests a parallel with Adam
and Eve’s hiding among the trees of the Garden after the Fall (Gen. 3.8), which,
according to Saint Paul, caused a “war” to break out “within the members” of

the human person (Romans 7.23) (see the note to line 72).

31-44. Then I stretched ... like one afraid: According to Aen. 3.1365, Aeneas, in Thrace in his first landfall after leaving Troy and wishing to
sacrifice to the gods, plucks wood in a thick grove; the roots bleed, and from
underground, Polydorus, youngest son of Priam, tells of his murder (Aen.
3.39—48):

209

Inferno

(Eloquar an sileam?) gemitus lacrimabilis imo
auditur tumulo et vox reddita fertur ad auris:
Quid miserum, Aenea, laceras? iam parce sepulto,

parce pias scelerare manus . . .
nam Polydorus ego. Hic confixum ferrea texit
telorum seges et iaculis increvit acutis.
Tum vero ancipiti mentem formidine pressus
obstipui steteruntque comae et vox faucibus haesit.
[Shall I speak or keep silent? from the depths
of the mound a tearful moan is heard and a voice comes to my ears:
“Why do you tear the miserable, Aeneas? spare one who is buried,
keep your pious hands from pollution . . .
for I am Polydorus. Murdered here, an iron crop
of spears and sharp javelins has grown up to cover me.”
Then truly, my mind oppressed by wavering fear,
I froze, my hair stood on end and my voice caught in my throat.]
32. plucked a small branch: In the Polydorus episode, Aeneas pulls up plants
by the roots. The pilgrim’s plucking of a branch may have been suggested by
Aen. 6.133—47, where the Sybil tells Aeneas that he must obtain the golden bough
if he is to enter Hades and return. In Aen. 3.22—40, the “plucking” of the bleeding branch, sure sign that Thrace is not his destined home, is a negative anticipation of the plucking of the golden bough.
33. its stem cried out ... split me: The “stem” (tronco) is the part of the
branch still on the tree. The soul speaks appropriately, since he is now a plant
(cf. “pluck,” line 35): this tension between human and vegetable persists through
the canto and involves rhetorical figures creating difficulty (antithesis, etymological figures, alliteration, catachresis, and others).

37-39. We were men... souls of serpents: Paratore (1968) observes that
in this tercet Piero refers to the three levels of animate being: humans (“men”),

animals (“‘serpents’’), and plants (“‘sticks’”). For other such triplets, see lines 64—

75. Canto 13 maintains the parallel of the circle of violence with the human
breast (see Additional Note 2). It draws on traditional metaphors (the heart was
a forest in its multitude ofdesires, as in Augustine’s Confessions 2.1.1; desires are

like birds; etc.) and on Aristotle’s doctrine that the heart was the dwelling of the
soul, from which it exerted all its powers, rational, animal (sensation, appetite,

and motion), and vegetative (nutrition, growth, and reproduction). (Aristotle
thought that the function of the brain, like that of the lungs, was to temper the
vital heat in the heart, the “hearth” of the body.)

Combining the principle of the unity of the soul with that of the essence of

210

Notes to Canto 13

humanity being the union of body and soul (6.110—12 and Purg. 4.1-12, 25.37
75, with notes), one can see the contrapasso here: since the suicides destroy the

most basic unity of the human being, that of body and soul, they suffer a reduction and dispersal of the soul’s complex powers, all now fulfilled, if at all, in
distorted and painful ways. Note the frequency of the terminology of binding
and knotting, the traditional language for the union of body and soul (e.g., John
Donne, “The Extasie,” line 64: “The subtle knot that makes us man”; cf.

Shakespeare, Antony and Cleopatra 5.2.303-4).
40-44. As when a green log ... words and blood: For the suicides to
speak—to express themselves—they must suffer wounds, like those which caused
the death of their bodies.
45. like one afraid: See Aen. 3.29—30 and 47—48, describing Aeneas’s terror
at the bleeding, speaking plants.

46-51. If he could have believed . . . pains me as well: Virgil must subject Piero to violence similar to what the Harpies inflict, so that the pilgrim may
be instructed. In his first Sermon on the Song of Songs, Bernard of Clairvaux draws
an extended analogy between the “opening” (interpretation) of a text of scripture and the breaking of the Eucharistic bread; this traditional analogy would

seem to underlie this passage, in which the breaking of Piero is necessary to the
disclosure of the nature of suicide.
55. You so tempt me: Literally, “you lure me with bait.” “ I am lured” (line
57) translates m’inveschi (literally, “I am enlimed,” a metaphor derived from the
use ofbirdlime, a sticky substance used in hunting small birds). This ceremoniously rhetorical opening suggests Piero’s elaborate chancery style. Beyond that,
they are richly ironic, given the Harpies and Piero’s being “bound” in his thornbush. In addition, it is probably relevant that falconry was a favorite occupation
of Piero’s lord, the emperor Frederick II (see 10.119 and note).
2?

6¢

58-61.
Iam he .. . from his intimacy: The speaker, never named but immediately identifiable, is Pietro or Piero delle Vigne (or della Vigna), born into
a modest family in Capua in southern Italy (Kingdom of Naples and Sicily) around
1190. After law studies at Bologna, Piero became in 1231 a notary in the imperial chancery, the most important nonecclesiastical bureaucracy of the period.
He rose rapidly to great influence and by 1234 was a principal author of the
Constitutions ofMelfi or Liber augustalis, Frederick’s epoch-making code oflaws.
Piero was famous as ajurist and judge and in 1246 was appointed protonotary
(in charge of government publications) and logothete (official spokesman). He

ZAG |

Inferno

was well known as a Latin prose stylist, especially in his widely circulated letters,
and wrote vernacular poetry; he is cited as an exemplar of rhetorical skill in
Brunetto Latini’s treatise on rhetoric (see Canto 15). In 1248 Frederick was

excommunicated a second time by the pope; in the same year, Piero was implicated, probably falsely, in a conspiracy against him. Arrested in 1249, he was
blinded and killed himself, apparently by dashing his head against a wall. Frederick
later held up Piero as an example of corruption in office, a traitor, and a “Simon”
(Simon Magus; cf. Canto 19); it is beyond dispute that Piero had reaped enormous financial gain while in office.
At the height of his influence, just as his namesake Peter the Apostle held “the
keys of the kingdom” (Matt. 16.19), Piero held the “keys” of influence with
Frederick, whose propaganda proclaimed him God’s vicar on earth. A letter from
a friend of Piero’s describes him as the keyholder of the emperor: “he closes and
none opens; he opens and none can close,” borrowing, like Dante here, the for-

mula from Is. 22.22, which is in turn the basis for Matt. 16.19 and again for
Apoc. 3.7. The smoothness of Piero’s operations as key turner stands in stark
contrast to the violence of his death. And there is further irony: in Italian, soave
[gently] is a pun on the name of Frederick’s hereditary lands, Swabia (Italian,
Soave).

62. I kept faith with my glorious office: Coming so emphatically after the
mention of the emperor’s name (Italian, Federigo), Piero’s assertion of faith (Ital-

ian, fede) inescapably suggests a play on the first two syllables of the name, perhaps also on the last two syllables (as equivalent to ricco, rich).
63. I lost sleep and vigor: A similar phrase to 1.90, describing the pilgrim’s
terror before the wolf.
64-66. The whore . . . vice of courts: Envy, the typical vice of courts, here
personified; note the triple periphrasis for Envy, capped by the explicit naming
only in line 78 (on envy, cf. 1.111, 6.74, and 15.68).

67-68. inflamed against me ... inflamed Augustus: The contiguity of
the three forms of the verb infiammare [to inflame] suggests the spreading of the
fire by contagion. A number of commentators cite Piero’s Eulogy for Frederick
II, which ends with the word inflammet (“let it enflame,” said of how examples

of fidelity incite others). This is also a key example of the triple constructions
we have been following, closely related to the triple periphrasis of Envy; to the
three hononific terms for Frederick, named only in verse 58 (Caesar, 65; Augustus,

68; and Lord, 75); to the sequence on degno [worthy] and its compound disdegno
[scorn] in 70, 71, and 75; and to the sequence on “unjust” and “just” (ingiusto
and giusto) in 72, and “I swear” (giuro) in 74.

PasWa

Notes to Canto 13

68-69. bright honors turned to sad mourning: The fire imagery is maintained in the changes from honors (lieti [Latin, Iaeti] associates the honors with
the traditional white color of festive garments) to the ashes represented by the
black of mourning. Piero’s fate follows the structure of a typical medieval tragedy, the sudden overturning of good fortune and descent into misfortune.
70-72. My spirit . . . against my just self: That is, Piero killed himself to
avoid scorn and humiliation, or perhaps to avoid the contempt of his lord,
Frederick, but in committing suicide he committed a crime against his own

innocence. In his attack on the Stoic idealizing of suicide, to him equivalent to
murder, Augustine maintains that the suicide of an otherwise innocent person is
a more serious crime than that of a guilty one (City of God 1.17; cf. the note to
line 87).
70. at the taste of disdain: There has been no satisfactory explanation of the
phrase per disdegnoso gusto [through disdainful taste], though there is some agreement that it cannot refer to taste in the sense of temperament. We follow Guido
da Pisa and Buti, who understood it to refer to Piero’s undergoing scorn; others

take it to refer to Piero’s scorn for his enemies.
72. made me unjust against my just self: In the Italian, this line is centered
on the paradox of suicide in the phrase me contra me [me against me], which condenses and almost spatializes the self-division of suicide; the order of terms, like
Piero’s act, gives first place to the injustice that destroys his innocence: that is,

ingiusto [unjust] precedes giusto [just].

73-75. By the strange new roots ... worthy of honor: Italian nove can
mean “new,” “strange,” or even “nine.”

These lines, which come at the middle of the canto and are the culmination
of Piero’s speech, are the focus of sharp disagreement. Most commentators take
them as Dante’s exoneration of Piero. This view is borne out by contemporary
sources, most of which agree that the evidence against Piero was fabricated.
Still, Piero’s suicide is itself an act of multiple disobedience: its victim is immediately the body, which the soul should care for; Piero’s suicide also contravenes the emperor’s prerogative of determining capital punishment, written by
Piero into the Constitutions ofMelfi (Title 14) of 1234, and this disobedience is

compounded by violation of God’s law. Aquinas’s discussion of suicide draws
both on Deut. 32.39 and on the idea, found in both Aristotle and Cicero’s

Somnium Scipionis, that in suicide the soul disobeys also by failing to care for the
“servant” in its charge, the body. Ina

certain sense, then, Piero, the new Peter,

“betrays” both Frederick and Christ. The question of “keeping faith” in the
canto thus includes keeping faith with the self by husbanding and caring for both

213

Inferno

body and soul, as well as with Nature and God: principal subjects, as we have
seen, of the circle of violence.

74. I never broke faith: See also line 62 and the words of Ovid’s Dryope

(Met. 9. 371-73):
Si qua fides miseris, hoc me per numina iuro
non meruisse nefas: patior sine crimine poenam!
Viximus innocuae. . .
[If the miserable can be believed, I swear by the gods
that I have not deserved this curse; I suffer punishment without a crime!

I lived innocent. . . .]

84. so much pity weighs on my heart: As a lay intellectual cast out and
condemned to death by his own city, Dante had strong reasons to identify with
Piero (Olschki 1940).
87. imprisoned spirit: Virgil’s phrase recalls Cavalcante’s “blind prison”
(10.58-59); the Epicureans who “make the soul die with the body” (10.13;
the phrase applies also to the suicides) include the emperor Frederick. Rabuse
(1958) showed that Dante’s language for the imprisonment of the souls in the
trees echoes the Neoplatonic argument that suicide, rather than freeing the soul
from the body, binds it more tightly to materiality (Macrobius, Commentarii 1.13—
14), and in Dante’s version to a lower form of materiality than that of the human

body (see the note to lines 97—100).
97-100. It falls into the wood ... then a woody plant: The language
distantly recalls Christ’s parable of the sower (Matt. 13.1-23), where the seed
is the word of God and the various places it falls (stony places, hard path, thorns,
and good soil) reflect the way the word is received by those who hear it; the
parable is combined here with the metaphor ofthe vine leaves (John 15.1—7),
where Christ is the vine and his disciples its branches. Piero’s name, “of the
vine,” and his status as a thornbush invoke the parallel with Christ as vine and

tree oflife (see also the parable of the vine in Is. 5.1—7, especially verse 6: “I
will make it desolate . . . briers and thorns shall come up”). Killing himself,
Piero has cast himself out of the vine (recalled by his own name) and cast the

“seed” ofhis soul into the unfruitful wood ofHell. His suicide makes him one
of those who could not conserve the word in their hearts when tribulation
arose (Matt. 13.20—21); and see Boethius, Consolation 1.6: “The nature and
strength of these troubles is such that they can dislodge a man, but they cannot
tear him out and completely uproot him.” Boethius’s Consolation is directly
relevant to Piero’s suicide, for it is the Middle Ages’ most influential discus-

214

Notes to Canto 13

sion of the injustice of rulers: Boethius was accused, he claimed falsely, of
conspiracy against the Gothic king Theodoric; his theme is the philosophical
and spiritual victory over misfortune, injustice, and death. The first book of
the Convivio, written early in Dante’s exile, shows that Dante identified very
strongly with Boethius’s fate.
103-5. Like the others . . . taken from oneself: Dante departs from orthodoxy here, which calls for the return of all souls to their bodies on the Day of

Judgment.

107. our corpses will hang: Cassell (1984) showed that the iconography of
the corpse in the tree derives from that of the suicide of Judas (see the note to
34.63).

109-29. We were still attentive . . . suffering members: These lines show
the punishment of the spendthrifts, after which we revert to the suicides. The

link between suicide and prodigal waste is suggested in Aristotle’s Nichomachean
Ethics 4.1: “The destruction of the good through which man lives is a certain
kind of destruction of himself” (cited in Summa theol. 2a 2ae, q. 119, a. 3).

112-14. like one. . . branches breaking: Gmelin notes that Dante abbreviates a simile ofStatius (Theb. 4.494—99), describing Eteocles of Thebes as he
waits for ghosts, conjured by Tiresias and Manto, who will predict the future

of Thebes; the augury takes place near the Field of Mars, where the city’s first
inhabitants were sown as dragon seed. For Florence and Thebes, see the note
to lines 143-44.
118-19.

The one in front . . . And the other: Identified as, respectively,

Arcolano da Squarcia di Riccolfo Maconi, a Sienese said by Boccaccio to be

a member of the “spendthrifts’ club” of Siena (see 29.130), killed in 1288
near Pieve al Toppo;

and Jacopo da Santo Andrea,

named

in line 133, a

member of the court of Frederick II, murdered by order of Azzolino da
Romano (for Azzolino, see 12.110 and note). Lana records that Iacopo ordered the burning ofhis own property in order to satisfy a whimsical desire to
see a fire.

118. Now hurry, hurry, death: Perhaps an appeal for extinction (and thus
release from suffering) as some argue; but Lano’s plea seems especially to reevoke
the scene of his death in battle, which, according to the early commentators, he

voluntarily sought as a solution to the ruin caused by his squandering.

Z15

Inferno

123. he made one clump ... a bush: Thus this squanderer’s pose echoes
the suicides, who have literally been joined to their bushes.

128. tearing him to pieces: See Ovid, Met. 3.250: “dilacerant falsi dominum
sub imagine cervi” [they tear their master apart under the false image of a stag].
In the allegorical reading by Fulgentius, the story of Actaeon (grandson of the
founder of Thebes) became an example of the destructive effects of excessive
spending. In the Ovidian tale, Actaeon is torn apart by his own hounds after
being transformed into a stag by Diana, goddess of hunting, outraged at being
seen naked. For Fulgentius, this means that Actaeon renounced hunting when
he saw its true nature (hence his mutation into a deer) but could not renounce
his beloved dogs, who ate him out of house and home. For other tales of squandering, see Canto 29.

143-44. the city that . . . its first patron: The first patron of Florence was
Mars, but when it was converted to Christianity the city took as its patron Saint
John the Baptist; in Dante’s day the Baptistery of Saint John was said to have
formerly been a temple of Mars.

143-50. I was from the city ... in vain: This unnamed suicide says that
Florence, destroyed by Attila (besieged in fact by Totila in a.p. 410) and refounded in 801, traditionally by Charlemagne, would not have survived had not

a fragmentary equestrian statue, thought to be of Mars, remained on the north
side of the Arno, near what is now the Ponte Vecchio. The suicide’s discourse

seems pagan in attributing such influence to the offended god. However, it was
believed that Florence had been refounded with Mars and Mercury in the ascendant; therefore the city was understood to be astrologically inclined both to
warfare (Mars) and to commerce (Mercury).

The passage thus can be taken as a reflection on Florence as it changed from
a small commune to a great commercial city, gradually exchanging feudal and
military values for commercial ones (the image of Saint John the Baptist was
stamped on the gold florin, the foundation of Florentine financial power; for
the florin, see the notes to 30.89-90). Rabuse (1958) argues that there is in the

Inferno a general pattern whereby the successive circles of Hell correspond to the
order—and influence—of the planets; the circle of violence as a whole would
reflect the astrological influence of Mars on the souls damned there and is the
principal focus of his book.

151. I made a gibbet for myself of my houses: That is, the anonymous
suicide hanged himself in his house. Since the first commentators, there has
been no consensus as to his identity; his anonymity facilitates his being taken

216

Notes to Canto 13

as a symbol of the “divided city” itself destroyed by its warring factions, its
“houses.” Lucan wrote that the people of Rome “in sua victrici conversum
viscera dextra” [turned its victorious right hand against its own vitals] (Pharsalia
1.3); civil war is thus the suicide of the body politic, as suicide is civil war
within the self. For the relation of the themes of civil war, suicide, and dismem-

berment in this canto, see MacKinnon [1988] 1989.

ZA,

Poi che la carita del natio loco
mi strinse, raunai le fronde sparte

e rende’le a colui, ch’era gia fioco.
Indi venimmo al fine ove si parte
lo secondo giron dal terzo, e dove
si vede di giustizia orribil arte.
A ben manifestar le cose nove,

10

dico che arrivammo ad una landa
che dal suo letto ogne pianta rimove;
la dolorosa selva l’é ghirlanda
intorno, come ’] fosso tristo ad essa:

13

16

1)

22

quivi fermammo i passi a randa a randa.
Lo spazzo era una rena arida e spessa,
non d’altra foggia fatta che colei
che fu da’ pié di Caton gia soppressa.
O vendetta di Dio, quanto tu dei

esser temuta da ciascun che legge
cid che fu manifesto a li occhi mei!
D’anime nude vidi molte gregge
che piangean tutte assai miseramente,
e parea posta lor diversa legge.
Supin giacea in terra alcuna gente,
alcuna si sedea tutta raccolta,

25

28

e altra andava contintiamente.
Quella che giva ’ntorno era piu molta,
e quella men che giacéa al tormento,
ma piu al duolo avea la lingua sciolta.
Sovra tutto 7] sabbion, d’un cader lento,

piovean di foco dilatate falde,
come di neve in alpe sanza vento.

218

CANTO

14

Seventh circle, third subcircle: the violent against God, Nature, or

industry—the burning plain—Capaneus—the rivers of Hell—the Old
Man of Crete

Compelled by love of my birthplace, I gathered
together the scattered leaves and returned them to
him, who was already silent.
Thence we came to the boundary where the
second subcircle is divided from the third, and where

one sees a horrible art of justice.
To make the new things clearly manifest, I say
that we arrived at a plain that removes every plant
from its bed;
10

iS

16

19

22

22

28

the grieving wood is a garland around it, as the
sad ditch is to the wood: we halted our steps at the
very edge.
The floor was coarse, dry sand, not made

differently from that once trodden by the feet of
Cato.
O vengeance of God, how much must you be
feared by everyone who reads what was made
manifest to my eyes!
Of naked souls I saw many flocks, all weeping
wretchedly, and different laws seemed to govern
them.
Some were lying supine on the earth, some were
sitting all huddled, and some were walking
ceaselessly.
The flock that was walking was largest by far, and
fewest were those lying to be tortured, but their
tongues were looser to cry out.
Over all the sand there rained, with a slow falling,
broad flakes of fire, like snow in the mountains

without wind.

219

Inferno

Sil

Quali Alessandro in quelle parti calde
d’India vide sopra ’] siio stuolo
fiamme cadere infino a terra salde,

34

per ch’ei provide a scalpitar lo suolo
con le sue schiere, accio che lo vapore
mei si stingueva mentre ch’era solo:

37

tale scendeva |’etternale ardore,
onde la rena s’accendea, com’ esca

sotto focile, a doppiar lo dolore.

40

Sanza riposo mai era la tresca

de le misere mani, or quindi or quinci
escotendo da sé l’arsura fresca.
43

I’ cominciai: “Maestro, tu che vinci
tutte le cose, fuor che ’ demon duri

46

49

ch’a l’intrar de la porta incontra uscinci,
chi € quel grande che non par che curi
lo ’ncendio e giace dispettoso e torto,
si che la pioggia non par che ’] maturi?”
E quel medesmo, che si fu accorto
ch’io domandava il mio duca di lui,
grido: “Qual io fui vivo, tal son morto.

52

55

Se Giove stanchi ’] suo fabbro da cui
crucciato prese la folgore aguta
onde l’ultimo di percosso fui—
o s’elli stanchi li altri a muta a muta
in Mongibello a la focina negra,
chiamando “Buon Vulcano, aiuta, aiuta!”

58

61

si com’ el fece a la pugna di Flegra—
e me saetti con tutta sua forza,
non ne potrebbe aver vendetta allegra.”
Allora il duca mio parlo di forza
tanto, ch’i’ non |’avea si forte udito:

64

“O Capaneo, in cid che non s’ammorza
la tua superbia, se’ tu piu: punito;
nullo martirio, fuor che la tua rabbia,

67

sarebbe al tuo furor dolor compito.”
Poi si rivolse a me con miglior labbia,

dicendo: “Quei fu l’un d’i sette regi
ch’assiser Tebe; ed ebbe, e par ch’elli abbia,
220

Canto 14

31

34

yi

Like the flames that Alexander saw, in those hot

parts of India, falling down on his host, whole all the
way to the ground,
so that he provided for the earth to be trampled
by his squadrons, since the burning was better
extinguished while separated:
so the eternal burning was coming down, and the
sand caught fire, like tinder beneath the flint, to

40

double the suffering.
Without any rest ever was the dancing of their
wretched hands, brushing away the fresh burning,
now from there, now from here.

43

46

I began: “Master, you who overcome all things,
save the hard demons who came out against us at
the gate,
who is that great one who seems not to mind the
fire, and lies there scornful and frowning, so that the

49

rain does not seem to ripen him?”
And he himself, when he perceived that I was
questioning my leader about him, cried out: “As I
was alive, so am I dead.

52

55

Though Jove tire out his smith, from whom he
wrathful took the sharp thunderbolt that struck me
on the last day—
and though he weary the others, turn after turn, at
the black forge in Mongibello, calling, ‘Good Vulcan,

58

61

64

67

help, help!’
as he did at the battle of Phlegra—and strike me
with all his force, he could not have happy
vengeance thereby.”
Then my leader spoke more forcefully than I had
ever heard him: “O Capaneus, since your pride
is not extinguished, you are punished more; no
punishment, other than your rage, would be
suffering of a measure with your fury.”
Then he turned back to me with a better look,

saying: “This was one of the seven kings who
besieged Thebes; and he had, and seems still to have,

22h

Inferno

70

Dio in disdegno, e poco par che ’] pregi;
ma, com’ io dissi lui, li suoi dispetti

sono al suo petto assai debiti fregi.
WS)

76

79

82

Or mi vien dietro, e guarda che non metti
ancor li piedi ne la rena arsiccia,
ma sempre al bosco tien li piedi stretti.”
Tacendo divenimmo 1a ’ve spiccia
fuor de la selva un picciol fiumicello,
lo cui rossore ancor mi raccapriccia.
Quale del Bulicame esce ruscello
che parton poi tra lor le peccatrici,
tal per la rena giu sen giva quello.
Lo fondo suo e ambo le pendici
fatt’ era ’n pietra, e ’ margini dallato,

per ch’io m’accorsi che ’1 passo era lici.
85

88

91

94

97

“Tra tutto l’altro ch’’ tho dimostrato

poscia che noi intrammo per la porta
lo cui sogliare a nessuno € negato,
cosa non fu da li tuoi occhi scorta
notabile com’ é ’| presente rio,
che sovra sé tutte fiammelle ammorta.”
Queste parole fuor del duca mio;
per ch’io ’] pregai che mi largisse ’1 pasto
di cui largito m’avéa il disio.
“In mezzo mar siede un paese guasto,”
diss’ elli allora, “che s’appella Creta,
sotto ’] cui rege fu gia ’l mondo casto.
Una montagna v’é che gia fu lieta
d’acqua e di fronde, che si chiamo Ida;

100

103

106

or é diserta come cosa vieta.
Réa la scelse gia per cuna fida
del suo figliuolo, e per celarlo meglio
quando piangea, vi facea far le grida.

Dentro dal monte sta dritto un gran veglio,
che tien volte le spalle inver’ Dammiata
e Roma guarda come stio speglio.
La sua testa é di fin oro formata,

e puro argento son le braccia e ’] petto,
poi é di rame infino a la forcata;
HIME

Canto 14

70

73

76

God in disdain, and respects him little; but, as I

said, his spite is the ornament his breast deserves.
Now follow me, and beware that you not place
your foot on the burning sand as yet, but keep your
feet still close within the wood.”
Silent we came to where a little stream spurts out
of the wood; its red color still makes me shudder.

79

As from Bulicame a river comes forth that the
sinning women then divide among themselves, so
this one flowed down across the sand.

82

Its bed and both its banks were made of stone,

85

88

91

94

and the margins on the sides, so that I perceived our
path lay there.
“Among all the other things I have shown you
since we entered the gate whose threshold is denied
to none,
nothing has been perceived by your eyes as
notable as the present river, which extinguishes all the
flames above it.”
These were my leader’s words, and I begged him
to grant me the food, since he had granted me the
hunger for it.
“In the midst of the sea lies a ruined land,” he said
then, “called Crete, under whose king the world once

7,

was chaste.
A mountain is there that once was happy with
water and foliage, called Ida; now it is desolate, like

100

an outworn thing.
Rhea chose it once to be the trusted cradle of her
son, and, the better to hide him when he cried,

103

106

ordered the shouting there.
Within the mountain stands erect a great old man,
with his back toward Damietta, looking toward Rome
as to his mirror.
His head is formed of fine gold, and pure silver
are his arms and breast; then he is of brass as far as
the fork;

223

Inferno

109

da indi in giuso é tutto ferro eletto,

salvo che ’] destro piede é terra cotta;
e sta ’’n su quel, pit che ’n su l’altro, eretto.
112

Ciascuna parte, fuor che l’oro, é rotta

115

d’una fessura che lagrime goccia,
le quali, accolte, foran quella grotta.
Lor corso in questa valle si diroccia;
fanno Acheronte, Stige e Flegetonta;
poi sen van giu per questa stretta doccia

118

infin, 14 ove piu non si dismonta,

121

fanno Cocito; e qual sia quello stagno
tu lo vedrai; pero qui non si conta.”
E io a lui: “Se ’] presente rigagno
si diriva cosi dal nostro mondo,

perché ci appar pur a questo vivagno?”’
124

Ed elli a me: “Tu sai che 7] loco é tondo;
e tutto che tu sie venuto molto,

127

pur a sinistra, gi calando al fondo,
non se’ ancor per tutto ’] cerchio volto;
per che, se cosa n’apparisce nova,
non de’ addur maraviglia al tuo volto.”

130

E io ancor: “Maestro, ove si trova

133

Flegetonta e Leté? ché de l’un taci,
e l’altro di’ che si fa d’esta piova.”
“In tutte tue question certo mi piaci,”
rispuose, “ma ’! bollor de l’acqua rossa
dovea ben solver l’una che tu faci.

136

Leté vedrai, ma fuor di questa fossa,

139

la dove vanno l’anime a lavarsi
quando la colpa pentuta é rimossa.”
Poi disse: “Omai é tempo da scostarsi
dal bosco; fa che di retro a me vegne:
li margini fan via, che non son arsi,

142

e sopra loro ogne vapor si spegne.”

224

Canto 14

109

from there downward he is all refined iron, except
that his right foot is baked clay; and on that one,
more than on the other, he stands erect.

112

115

118

121

124

Each part of him, except his golden head, is
broken by a crack that drips tears, which, gathering,
bore through that cave.
Their course plunges into this valley; they become
Acheron, Styx, and Phlegethon; then they go on
down through this narrow duct,
until, where there is no further descent, they

become Cocytus; and what that pool is like you will
see, so that I do not describe it here.”
And I to him: “If the present stream flows down
in this way from our world, why does it appear only
at this border?”
And he to me: “You know that the place is
circular; and although you have come a long way,
descending and turning always to the left, toward the
bottom,

127

130

you have not yet tured through the whole circle;
so that if we see some new thing, it should not bring
amazement to your face.”
And I again: “Master, where are Phlegethon and
Lethe? for you are silent about the one, and the other

133

136

139

142

you say flows from this rain of tears.”
“In all your questions, certainly, you please me,”
he replied, “but the boiling of the red water ought to
answer one of them.
Lethe you will see, but outside this ditch, there
where the souls go to be washed once their repented
guilt has been removed.”
Then he said: “Now it is time for us to leave the
wood; see that you come behind me: the margins
provide a path, for they are not burned,
|
and above them every flame is extinguished.”

i re
225

NOTES

1-3. Compelled . . . already silent: Note the contrast between the pilgrim’s
“Jove,” which attempts to gather and reunite, and the suicides’ violent division
of themselves.
3. him, who was already silent: The unnamed Florentine suicide of 13.130—
51, who has fallen silent. Chiavacci Leonardi observes that this verse establishes

that fioco could mean “mute” in 1.63 (see the note to 1.62—63).

6. a horrible art of justice: “Horrible” (orribil) means what causes one’s hair
to bristle (cf. 3.31, with note): the ingenuity of God’s justice should terrify one.
8-39. a plain . . . to double the suffering: The punishment of the violent
against God, nature, or industry (11.46—51) is derived from the biblical account
of the destruction of the “cities of the plain,” Sodom and Gomorrtha, because of
the violent homosexuality of the citizens (Genesis 19), especially verses 24—28:
And the Lord rained upon Sodom and Gomorrha brimstone and fire from
the Lord out of heaven. And he destroyed these cities, and all the country
about, all the inhabitants of the cities, and all things that spring from the

earth. And his [Lot’s] wife looking behind her, was turned into a statue of
salt. And Abraham got up early in the morning, and in the place where he
had stood before with the Lord, he looked toward Sodom and Gomorrha,

and the whole land of that country: and he saw the ashes rise up from the
earth as the smoke of a furnace.
The destruction of the cities of the plain was said to be a figure of the Last Judgment as early as the New Testament (2 Peter 2.6—9). The burning plain of Cantos 14-17, like that of Sodom (cf. Gen. 13.10), and like the wood of the sui-

cides, is an anti-Eden (on the desolation of Crete, see the note to lines 94-120).

In the body analogy, the burning plain represents a perversion of fundamental powers of the human soul, located, according to Aristotelian doctrine, in the

heart (see the note to 13.37—39). The emphasis on sterility derives especially from
the biblical condemnation of homosexuality as directly counter to God’s injunction to Adam and Eve and to Noah to people the world (Gen. 1.28, 8.17, and
9.1). The thread of logic that links the three sins of this subcircle (blasphemy,
sodomy, and usury)—to modern minds rather disparate (but see the note to
11.46-51)—1s their relation to God’s creative power, of which human repro-

duction and human industry are both analogues and instances. (For the view
that “Sodom” is some other sin, see the note to 11.46—51.)

9. removes every plant from its bed: In contrast with the wood of the
suicides, the implicit downward sequence (from human to animal to plant) is

226

Notes to Canto 14

carried a step further; compare Gen. 19.25: “destroyed.
from the earth.”

. . all things that spring

12. at the very edge: The Italian doublet (a randa a randa, literally “at the edge
at the edge”), a characteristic mode of emphasis (cf. 17.134: al pié al pié, “at the
very foot,” also 17.101, 17.115), is the first of several instances in the canto.

13. coarse, dry sand ... feet of Cato: The reference is to the crossing of
the northern Sahara in Libya by Cato the Younger and his army during the war
of the Roman Senate, supporting Pompey the Great, against Julius Caesar. Dante’s
many references to this episode (see also Cantos 24—25) derive especially from
Lucan’s Pharsalia (Book 9), as does his conception of Cato, the hero of Lucan’s

poem, who appears in Purgatorio 1. According to Ovid (Met. 2.236-37), the Sahara
was the result of Phaéthon’s loss of control of the chariot of the sun, which
scorched the earth as it came too close.
16. how much must you be feared: This is one of Dante’s few direct references to the traditional purpose of accounts of the next life: to affect men’s conduct by instilling fear of punishment or desire of reward there (see, e.g.,
Macrobius, Commentarii 1.1.4—5).

22-24. Some were lying . . . walking: The three “laws” (line 21) obviously
correspond to the three sins (blasphemy, usury, and sodomy, respectively) punished in this subcircle.
30. like snow in the mountains without wind: The line conspicuously echoes
a famous plazer (a short poem—in Italian often, as in this case, a sonnet—listing
delightful things) by Guido Cavalcanti, “Bilta di donna e di saccente core,” line
6: “e bianca neve scender senza vento” [and white snow falling without wind];
the addition of “in the mountains” strikingly intensifies it, just as depicting fire
as snow intensifies the biblical “rained . . . brimstone and fire.”

31-36. Like the flames that Alexander saw . . . while separated: This wonder
is derived, as the modern commentators note, from a passage in Albertus Magnus’s
De meteoris

Callisthenes’

1.4.8, which

conflates

two

separate

episodes

in the Pseudo-

Letter (purportedly from Alexander to his tutor, Aristotle):

“Alexander writes in his letter on the marvels of India a marvelous description,

saying that ignited clouds fell from the air in the manner of snow and that he
ordered his men to trample them” (E.D.).
35-36. the burning . . . while separated: That is, if each flame (“burning,”
vapore) was extinguished before it combined with others.
40. the dancing of their wretched hands: The Italian word we translate
with “dancing” here is tresca, used for a vigorous peasant dance involving rapid

227

Inferno

movements of both hands and feet; the word apparently derives from an Old
Gothic word meaning “to pound,” and, with its derivatives, was often used as a
derogatory sexual metaphor (Devoto and Oli 1971).
46-72. that great one: Capaneus, one of the Seven against Thebes (line 68),
known to Dante in Statius’s version, the Thebaid (he appears in 3.598-670, 4.16586,
5.563-87, 6.731-825, and 9.540-69; he is prominent in Book 10, his death nar-

rated in 10.827—939, one of the most vigorous parts of the poem). He is portrayed
as a gigantic, enormously proud warrior, a contemner of the gods, praying only to
his own right hand (9.548-50, 10.482-86), comparable to the centaurs and Cyclops
(3.604—5). The first to surmount the walls of Thebes, he disdains its earthly littleness, challenges Bacchus and Hercules (its patrons) to defend it, and then, disdaining lesser gods, challenges Jupiter himself; Jupiter strikes him with a thunderbolt
(10.899-939)—another instance of fire from Heaven. For Dante’s many other references to the Theban material, see the notes to 26.52—54, 30.1—27, and 33.88-90.

46-48. who seems not to mind ... to ripen him: Note the parallel with
Farinata, who seems to have Hell “in great disdain” (10.36; cf. 14.70). The sar-

casm of line 48 derives from the antithesis implicit in the rain of fire (with allusion
to Gen. 19.24-25) and the sterility that it causes (see “Textual Variants,” p. 585).

47. scornful and frowning: The line echoes Statius’s description of Capaneus’s
dead body as “torvus adhuc visu” [still frowning in appearance].
51. As I was alive . . . dead: A reference to the Stoic ideal of consistency and
imperturbability, again involving allusion to Farinata.
52-60. Though Jove . . . happy vengeance thereby: Capaneus is claiming
that Jupiter is terrified of him. Statius, following the tradition that had Jupiter’s
thunderbolts fashioned by Vulcan and his Cyclops helpers at his forge under
Mount Aetna, has Jupiter demand the thunderbolts and refer to the Battle of

Phlegra (where the giants, attacking the gods, were struck down byJove’s thunderbolts—see Vergil, Georgics 1.278-83, Ovid, Met. 10.149-51; in the Inferno,
the giants appear in Canto 31) as he laughs at Capaneus’s folly (Theb. 10.911).
Mongibello, the popular name for Mount Aetna, is a compound of Latin mons
and Arabic jabal, both meaning “mountain.”
55. turn after turn: In the Italian, a muta a muta [literally, in turn in turn] and
aiuto, aiuto [help, help] (line 55) are further instances of the idiomatic emphasis
by repetition (as in line 12)

61-66. Then my leader ... with your fury: Virgil’s spirited rebuke of
Capaneus may remind us of Capaneus’s difference from the hero of the Aeneid,
the “dutiful” Aeneas (pius Aeneas).

63-64. your pride is not extinguished: Note the fire metaphor.

228

Notes to Canto 14

69-70.

he had . . . God in disdain: The language again recalls Farinata (10.36);

presumably Farinata is less a scorner of God than Capaneus, or he would be
punished here; the correlations are perhaps meant to require the reader to consider the nuances of difference.
68, 70, 72. regi... pregi. . . fregi: The same rhymes (in two cases the same
words) are used of the furious Filippo Argenti in 8.47, 49, and 51, as the commentators observe.

72. the ornament his breast deserves: Again the emphasis on the breast (see
the note to lines 8-39).
76-78. Silent we came . . . shudder: The color makes the pilgrim shudder
because it is that of blood, perhaps including the blood that issues from the
wounded shrubs imprisoning the suicides; as we soon learn, it is a continuation
of the river of blood of Canto 12.

79-80.

As from Bulicame . . . divide among themselves: Bulicame (used

by Dante as a common noun in 12.117 for the river of blood; the word means,

literally, “boiled [or boiling] thing,” often used for hot springs) is a sulfurous
spring, colored red, near Viterbo. “The sinning women” was explained by the
early commentators as a reference to prostitutes having special conduits for
the waters of the Bulicame, perhaps as a curative (prostitutes were barred from
the public baths). Some modern critics argue for the reading pettatrici [carders]—
that is, industrial preparers of wool, who did use such streams; this reading is not

supported by the manuscripts but could be related to other industrial images in
the canto (those of the smithy in lines 55—56, pottery in line 110, and metallurgy [perhaps] in lines 106-9).
89-90. the present river .. . all the flames: Since the river extinguishes the
flames and thus provides a safe path for the pilgrim, it is closely related to the path
provided by the earthquake discussed in 12.31—45, and thus to Chnist’s death. In
terms of the body analogy, “vapors” were said to rise upward from the bloodstream.
94-120. In the midst . . . describe it here: Dante’s elaborate, syncretic myth
of the Old Man of Crete has not been fully explained. It represents in some sense
both the history and the present state of mankind. See Additional Note 3.

118-19. where there is no further descent . . . Cocytus: That is, Cocytus
is located at the very bottom of Hell, “where Dis is enthroned” (11.65).
134. the boiling of the red water: In other words, the river of blood of Canto
12 is the classical Phlegethon (see the note to 8.19).
136.

Lethe you will see: In the Earthly Paradise, the true Eden, at the sum-

mit of the mountain of Purgatory.

222

CANTO:

i

Ora cen porta l’un de’ duri margini,
e ’] fummo del ruscel di sopra aduggia,
si che dal foco salva l’acqua e li argini.
Qual i Fiamminghi tra Guizzante e Bruggia,
temendo ’] fiotto che ’nver’ lor s’avventa,

10

fanno lo schermo perché ’] mar si fuggia;
e quali Padoan lungo la Brenta,
per difender lor ville e lor castelli,
anzi che Carentana il caldo senta:
a tale imagine eran fatti quelli,
tutto che né si alti né si grossi,
qual che si fosse, lo maestro félli.

13

Gia eravam da la selva rimossi
tanto ch’i’ non avrei visto dov’ era,

16

19

22,

25

perch’ io in dietro rivolto mi fossi,
quando incontrammo d’anime una schiera
che venian lungo I’argine, e ciascuna
ci riguardava come suol da sera
guardare uno altro sotto nuova luna;
e si ver’ noi aguzzavan le ciglia
come ’] vecchio sartor fa ne la cruna.
Cosi adocchiato da cotal famiglia,
fui conosciuto da un, che mi prese
per lo lembo e grido: “Qual maraviglia!”
E io, quando ’] suo braccio a me distese,

ficcai li occhi per lo cotto aspetto,
si che ’l viso abbrusciato non difese
28

la conoscenza siia al mio ’ntelletto;
e chinando la mano a la sua faccia,

rispuosi: “Siete voi qui, ser Brunetto?”

230

GANT

Oa.

The literary sodomites—Brunetto Latini—prophecy of Dante’s future

Now one of the hard margins carries us along,
and the vapor from the river gives a shelter that
protects the water and the banks from the fire.
As the Flemings, between Wissant and Bruges,

fearing the tide that rises against them, make dykes
to escape the sea;
and as the Paduans do along the Brenta, to protect
their farms and castles, before Carinthia feels the
10

13

thaw:
after that image were these made, though not so
high nor so thick, whoever he may have been, the
master-builder made them.
We had already come so far from the wood that I
would not have seen where it was, though I had
turned back,

16

when we encountered a band of souls coming
along the barrier, and each was gazing at us as in the
evening

19

people gaze at one another under the new moon;

22

and they sharpened their brows toward us as the old
tailor does at the eye of his needle.
Looked over in this way by such a company, I
was recognized by one, who seized me by the hem
and cried: “What a marvel!”

25

28

And I, when he stretched out his arm toward me,

penetrated with my eye his baked appearance, so
that his scorched face did not prevent
my intellect from recognizing him; and, reaching
my hand down toward his face, I replied: “Are you
here, ser Brunetto?”’

Zot

Inferno

31

34

E quelli: “O figliuol mio, non ti dispiaccia
se Brunetto Latino un poco teco
ritorna ’n dietro e lascia andar la traccia.”
I’ dissi lui: “Quanto posso, ven preco;
e se volete che con voi m/’asseggia,
farol, se piace a costui, che vo seco.”

SW

40

43

46

49

“O figliuol,” disse, “qual di questa greggia
s’arresta punto, giace poi cent’ anni
sanz’ arrostarsi quando ’] foco il feggia.
Pero va oltre: i’ ti verro a’ panni,
e poi rigiugnero la mia masnada,
che va piangendo i suoi etterni danni.”
Io non osava scender de la strada
per andar par di lui, ma ’] capo chino
tenea com’ uom che reverente vada.
El comincio: “Qual fortuna o destino
anzi l’ultimo di qua git ti mena?
e chi é questi che mostra ’] cammino?”
“La su di sopra, in la vita serena,”
rispuos’ io lui, “mi smarri’ in una valle,

52

55

avanti che l’eta mia fosse piena.
Pur ier mattina le volsi le spalle:
questi m’apparve, tornand’ io in quella,
e reducemi a ca per questo calle.”
Ed elli a me: “Se tu segui tua stella,
non puoi fallire a glorioso porto,
se ben m/’accorsi ne la vita bella;

58

61

e s’io non fossi si per tempo morto,
veggendo il cielo a te cosi benigno
dato t’avrei a l’opera conforto.
Ma quello ingrato popolo maligno
che discese di Fiesole ab antico,

e tiene ancor del monte e del macigno,
64

ti si fara, per tuo ben far, nimico;

ed é ragion, ché tra li lazzi sorbi
si disconvien fruttare al dolce fico.
67

Vecchia fama nel mondo li chiama orbi;

gent’ € avara, invidiosa e superba:
dai lor costumi fa che tu ti forbi.
232

Canto 15

31

And he: “O my son, let it not displease you if
Brunetto Latino turns back with you a little and lets his
troop run on.”

34

I said to him: “As much as I can, I beg you; and if

you wish me to sit down with you, I will do so, if he
over there permits it, for | am going with him.”
oY,

40

43

46

49
52

55

58

61

“O son,” he said, “whoever of this flock stands still

for an instant, must then lie for a hundred years
without brushing off the fire that strikes him.
Therefore walk on; I will come along at your skirts,
and then I will rejoin my crew, who go bewailing their
eternal losses.”
I did not dare descend from the path to walk level
with him, but I kept my head bowed, as one might
walk reverently.
He began: “What fortune or destiny leads you
down here before your last day? and who is this
showing you the way?”
“Up there above, under the clear sky,” I replied, “I
lost myself in a valley, before my age was full.
Only yesterday morning did I turn my back on it:
he appeared to me as I was returning there again,
and is leading me back home by this road.”
And he to me: “If you follow your star, you
cannot fail to reach a glorious port, if I perceived
well during sweet life;
and if I had not died so early, seeing the heavens
so kindly toward you I would have given you
strength for the work.
But that ungrateful, malicious people who came
down from Fiesole of old, and still smack of the

64

67

mountain and the granite,
will become your enemies because of your just
actions; and that is reasonable, for among the sour
crab apples it is not fitting that the sweet fig bear its fruit.
Ancient fame in the world calls them blind; they
are a people avaricious, envious, and proud: see that
you keep yourself clean of their customs.

233

Inferno

70

La tua fortuna tanto onor ti serba
che l’una parte e l’altra avranno fame
di te; ma lungi fia dal becco l’erba.

We

Faccian le bestie fiesolane strame
di lor medesme, e non tocchin la pianta,
s’alcuna surge ancora in lor letame,

76

in cui riviva la sementa santa
di que’ Roman che vi rimaser quando
fu fatto il nido di malizia tanta.”
“Se fosse tutto pieno il mio dimando,”
rispuos’ io lui, “voi non sareste ancora
de ’'umana natura posto in bando;

VW

82

ché ’n la mente m’é fitta, e or m’accora,

85

la cara e buona imagine paterna
di voi quando nel mondo ad ora ad ora
m’insegnavate come l’uom s’etterna;
e quant’ io |’abbia in grado mentr’io vivo
convien che ne la mia lingua si scerna.

88

i

Cio che narrate di mio corso scrivo,

e serbolo a chiosar con altro testo
a donna che sapra, s’a lei arrivo.
Tanto vogli’ io che vi sia manifesto,
pur che mia coscienza non mi garra,
ch’a la Fortuna, come vuol, son presto.

94

Non € nuova a li orecchi miei tal arra:
pero giri Fortuna la sua rota
come le piace, e ’] villan la sua marra.”

100

Lo mio maestro allora in su la gota
destra si volse in dietro e riguardommi;
poi disse: “Bene ascolta chi la nota.”
Ne per tanto di men parlando vommi

103

li suoi compagni piu noti e piu sommi.
Ed elli a me: “Saper d’alcuno é buono;

SH

con ser Brunetto, e dimando chi sono

de li altri fia laudabile tacerci,
106

ché ’] tempo saria corto a tanto suono.
In somma sappi che tutti fur cherci
e litterati grandi e di gran fama,
d’un peccato medesmo al mondo lerci.
234

Canto 15

70

Your fortune holds so much honor in store for
you, that both sides will hunger for you; but let the
grass be far from the goat.

73

Let the Fiesolan beasts make straw of each other,

but let them not touch the plant, if any still sprout in
their manure,
76

79
82

in which may live again the holy seed of the
Romans who remained there when that nest of so
much malice was built.”
“If my request were all fulfilled,” I replied to him,
“you would not yet be banished from human nature;
for in my memory is fixed, and now it weighs on
my heart, the dear, kind paternal image of you when,
in the world, from time to time

85

you used to teach me how man makes himself
eternal; and how grateful I am for that, as long as I

88

91

94

97

100

103

106

live must be discerned in my language.
What you narrate about my path I am writing
down and keeping to be glossed, with other texts, by
a lady who will know, if I reach her.
This much I would make manifest to you, that as
long as my conscience does not reproach me I am
ready for Fortune, whatever she will.
This pledge is not new to my ears: therefore let
Fortune turn her wheel as she pleases, and the peasant
his hoe.”
My master then turned around over his right cheek
and gazed at me; then he said: “He listens well who
takes note.”
Nonetheless I go speaking with ser Brunetto, and I
ask him of his more famous and accomplished
companions.
And he to me: “To know of some is fitting; about
the others silence is praiseworthy, for the time would
be too short for so much noise.

In brief, know that they were all clerks and great
men of letters, of great fame, all fouled with the same
sin in the world.

Zoo!

Inferno

109

Priscian sen va con quella turba grama,

e Francesco d’Accorso anche; e vedervi,
112

115

118

s’avessi avuto di tal tigna brama,
colui potei che dal servo de’ servi
fu trasmutato d’Arno in Bacchiglione,
dove lascio li mal protesi nervi.
Di pit direi, ma ’] venire e ’] sermone
piu lungo esser non puo, pero ch’i’ veggio
la surger nuovo fummo del sabbione.
Gente vien con la quale esser non deggio.
Sieti raccomandato il mio Tesoro,

12H

124

nel qual io vivo ancora, e pit. non cheggio.”
Poi si rivolse, e parve di coloro
che corrono a Verona il drappo verde
per la campagna; e parve di costoro
quelli che vince, non colui che perde.

236

Canto 15

109

Priscian goes along with that wretched crowd, and
Francesco d’Accorso, too; and, if you had desired

such scurf, you could see there
112

115

118

him who by the Servant of servants was

transmuted from Arno to Bacchiglione, where he
left his ill-protended muscles.
I would say more, but my walking and my speech
can last no longer, for I see new smoke rising from the
sand over there.
People are coming with whom I must not be. Let
my Treasure be commended to you, in which I live
still, and I ask no more.”

121

Then he turned back, and he seemed one of those

who at Verona race for the green cloth across the
fields; and of those he seemed
124

the one who wins, not the one who loses.

Sc

ZS),

NOTES

2. vapor from the river: Discussed in the note to 14.89—90.
4-12. As the Flemings . . . the master-builder made them: Dante’s simile
compares the “margins” of the river of blood with the dykes that protect the
Flemings from the tides and the Paduans from the annual flooding of the river
Brenta. The river of blood is contained within these stone “banks” (14.82), which,

with their wide margins on which the pilgrim and Virgil walk, are thought of as
elevated, probably to somewhat less than the height of a man (see lines 23, 29,
35, and 40); in 17.6 the margins are said to be of marble.

4. Flemings, between Wissant and Bruges: Parodi (1920) pointed out that the
Italian forms of these names (Fiamminghi, Guizzante, and Bruggia) sound like the
words for “flaming” (fiammeggia), “wriggling” (guizzante), and “burning” (brucia).
Puns and equivocal language are frequent in this canto of sodomy.
5. the tide: Dante may be echoing accounts of the tides in Ovid, Lucan, and

Brunetto Latini, represented as the strife of the sea against the land.
9. Carinthia: This is a region in Austria; in Dante’s time, the term was used to

include the Carnic Alps, where Dante thought the Brenta originated.
15. though I had turned back: The line means, of course, that he did not turn

back. The mention of looking back, in a context involving the destruction of
Sodom, recalls Lot’s wife, who, although warned by the angel, did look back
and was turned into a “statue of salt” (Gen. 19.26).
16-21. we encountered a band .. . eye of his needle: From Virgil’s exposition in 11.49-51 and from 14.22—-24, we deduce that these souls are
sodomites. The scene, which moved T. S. Eliot to his imitation in “Little
Gidding,” is of groups of people, out at night in the dark of the moon, near
the walls of the city.
18-19. as in the evening ... under the new moon: The commentators
note the echo of Aen. 6.270-—72:

quale per incertam lunam sub luce maligna
est iter in silvis, ubi caelum condidit umbra

Iuppiter, et rebus nox abstulit atra colorem.

238

Notes to Canto 15

[like a path in the woods, because of an uncertain moon, under bad light

_ when Jupiter has hidden the sky with darkness,
and black night has taken away color from things.]

22. company: Dante’s term here (famiglia, family) was used to refer to the servants and dependents of even a large household or enterprise, including a city
(here it strongly suggests the night watch), or to a group linked by shared activity or ideals (e.g., of the philosophers in Limbo, 4.132); compare masnada (41),
used of the body-servants of a lord.
23. seized me by the hem: Augustine’s Confessions 8.11.26 suggests a context and meaning for this gesture: “My lovers of old, trifles of trifles and vanities, held me back. They plucked at my fleshly garment, and they whispered
softly: “Do you cast us off?’ and ‘From that moment we shall be no more with
you forever and ever!’” (tr. Ryan) (see the note to line 124).
25-29. stretched out his arm. . . penetrated with my eye . . . reaching
my hand down: Brunetto’s scrutiny of the pilgrim and the pilgrim’s of Brunetto
are followed, in each case, by a physical gesture indicating both intimacy and
affection.
27. his scorched face: Brunetto (whose name means “dark”) is burned over
his whole body; in some Italian cities (though not Florence), burning was a frequent civil penalty for sodomy.

30. Are you here, ser Brunetto: The pilgrim is apparently surprised to see
Brunetto among the sodomites; in fact there is no mention in the chroniclers of
his having been one. The title ser identifies Brunetto as a notary, and as was

appropriate in addressing a distinguished elder, Dante addresses him with the
respectful voi (see the note to 10.49—51).
Brunetto Latini was born in Florence about 1220, and died there about 1294.
In 1260, when returning from an embassy to Alfonso X of Castile, he learned of

the defeat of the Guelfs at Montaperti (1260) and changed his destination to
Montpellier and then Paris, where he lived privately, supported by a merchant
friend. After the victory of the Guelfs in 1266 Brunetto returned to Florence and
was prominent in public life; in 1289 he was appointed public orator. Brunetto
was an important figure in what might be called the proto-humanistic movement,
urging the practice of civic virtue and the study of classical rhetoric; his most significant works were the Trésor (a short encyclopedia in French with emphasis on
rhetoric and government), the Tesoretto (a didactic poem in Italian; see the note to
1.2), and translations into Italian of part of Cicero’s.De inventione and several of his

orations. For the question whether Brunetto’s sin was something other than
homosexuality, see the note to 11.46—51.

239

Inferno

31. O my son: The expression recurs in line 37. Since Brunetto was about
forty-five years older than Dante, the expression is natural; the theme of Brunetto

as a father figure is fundamental to the episode.
32. Brunetto Latino: Dante’s having Brunetto refer to himself in the third
person seems to echo a mannerism of Brunetto’s (especially in the Tesoretto),
revealing a devotion to personal fame.
33. turns back with you a little: For an allegorical reading of Brunetto’s turn
back with Dante, see the note to line 124.

36. if he over there permits it: Perhaps to emphasize the difference between
Brunetto and his present guide, Dante avoids naming Virgil in the narrative of this
canto.
38. must then lie for a hundred years: In other words, suffer for a hundred
years the fate of the blasphemers (see 11.49—51).
40. I will come along at your skirts: Imposed by the difference in height
between the top of the wall and the floor of the plain, Brunetto’s position is of
course symbolic of a radical reversal of roles (see the note to line 124). Panni is
literally “cloths”; the reference is to the full, ankle-length skirts of Dante’s gar-

ment. This line is the climactic one in a series of references to cloth and clothing. See also lines 21, 23-24, 111, 123-24.

46-48. fortune or destiny . . . showing you the way: See Aen. 6.531-34,
where Deiphobus inquires of Aeneas:
Sed te qui vivum casus, age fare vicissim,

attulerint. Pelagine venis erroribus actus
an monitu divum? An quae te fortuna fatigat,
ut tristis sine sole domos, loca turbida, adires?

[But what events—tell me—have brought you here alive?
Driven wandering over the deep do you come,
or at the bidding of the gods? What misfortune harasses you,
that you visit these sad homes and sunless, this place of confusion?]

48. who is this: See the note to line 36.
50. I lost myself in a valley: Here the pilgrim for the first time describes his
experience at the beginning of the poem in language similar to the terms of the
poem itself (1.1—7); the parallel with the Tesoretto (see 1.2) is perhaps an acknowledgment of Brunetto’s influence.

52. did I turn my back on it: See the note to line 33.

240

Notes to Canto 15

54. is leading me back home: Heaven is the fatherland, or home (see the
note to line 56).
55. If you follow your star: Whether or not Brunetto refers here to Dante’s
natal sign, Gemini, to which he attributes his talent (Par. 22.112-14), is disputed
(see the note to line 59).

56. a glorious port: Dante uses the metaphor of the port in Convivio 4.12-18
as part of his discussion of human life as the soul’s journey back to God (to
“glory”). Although many commentators take Brunetto’s words to refer exclusively to earthly fame, there is no clear justification for so limiting their meaning. The complementary relation between astrological influence and grace is a
major theme of the entire poem (see, e.g., 26.23—24).

58-60. if I had not died . . . strength for the work: Some would limit the
meaning of “work” here to Dante’s political career, which began in 1295, one
year after Brunetto’s death, but it seems artificial not to think of Dante’s literary

work, which began early and continued throughout his life.
59. seeing the heavens so kindly toward you: The reference is to benign
astrological influences.
61--62. people who came down from Fiesole of old: Ab antico here means
“in ancient times.” The allusion is to the story, half-fact, half-legend, that Fiesole
was led by Catiline’s sympathizers to revolt against Rome (Trésor 1.37.1—2), and
that after Fiesole had been razed by Julius Caesar, and Florence was built on the
Arno not far away, the surviving Fiesolans, including descendants of Catiline’s
followers, were mixed in with the Roman colonists.

63. smack of the mountain and the granite: That is, they are rustic and
resistant to civilized ways. This was a common Florentine view of the Fiesolans
(see Davis 1967).

64. will become your enemies . . . just actions: Brunetto is referring to
Dante’s exile, predicted by Farinata (10.79-81). Dante puts in Brunetto’s mouth
the phrase ben far, which the pilgrim had used (6.81) when asking about other
Florentines.
65-66. among the sour crab apples . . . bear its fruit: Brunetto is using
biblical language; see especially Matt. 7.16—19:
By their fruits ye shall know them. Do men gather grapes of thorns, or
figs of thistles? Even so every good tree bringeth forth good fruit, and the
evil tree bringeth forth evil fruit. A good tree cannot bring forth evil fruit,
neither can an evil tree bring forth good fruit.

241

Inferno

71. both sides: The Blacks, who exiled Dante, and the Whites, with whom

Dante was still associated in the first years of his exile (1302—early 1304); he
denounces the Whites in Par. 17.61—69.

72. the goat: The Italian here permits also “beak” or “snout.”
76-77. holy seed of the Romans: A reference to the Romans who lived in
Florence after the incorporation of the Fiesolans. The seed (descendants) of the
Romans is holy because of the providential status of the Roman empire
(2.13=33).
78. nest of so much malice: For analogous phrases, see 11.57 and Purg. 11.99.
Throughout the Inferno, Florence will be compared with the Earthly City, whose
archetype is Hell (as well as with Sodom and Thebes) (see the notes to 3.1 and

6.61).
79-81. If my request . . . from human nature: Since the pilgrim says “not
yet,” the sentence must refer to Brunetto’s death: the pilgrim wishes Brunetto
had not died so early (see line 58). But it must refer also to Brunetto’s damnation (see 23.126, “the eternal exile,” for damnation). (The tension here is closely
related to that concerning Guido Cavalcanti in 10.52—72: if Guido is alive, he

may still repent.)
82. in my memory is fixed: See Vergil’s words (Aen. 4.3—4) on Dido’s love
for Aeneas: “haerent infixi pectore vultus/ verbaque” [his face and words are
fixed deep in her breast].
83. kind paternal image: Here the pilgrim himself asserts the relation claimed
by Brunetto in lines 31 and 37. (Dante’s own father died when he was eighteen;
Guido, of course, is metaphorically a brother.) Brunetto is the person, in addition to Virgil and Beatrice, to whom Dante attributes the most influence on his
adult values and activities.
84. from time to time: The Italian is ad ora ad ora [literally, to time to time],
another idiomatically repetitive expression (see the notes to 14.12 and 55).

85. how man makes.

.

. eternal: This is no doubt a reference to earthly

glory, as in line 56. In the strictest sense, however, both lines also include refer-

ence to salvation. The quest for glory, particularly literary fame, is not regarded
by Dante as inconsistent with salvation (see 1.79-87, 2.104—5, and 24.43-57).

242

Notes to Canto 15

The pathos of Brunetto’s situation is that of one who understood (and in his
works asserted) Christian values but, because he did not “chastise his body” (see
lines 121—24, with note), forfeited eternity. Limiting lines 56 and 85 exclusively
to the quest for secular fame is an impoverishment of the episode. After all, line
85 is spoken by the pilgrim.
86-87. how grateful Iam. . . in my language: Given the number of echoes of Brunetto’s works in the Comedy and other works, the pilgrim’s words are
no more than the truth. However, this canto is the only evidence that has survived attributing sodomy to Brunetto.
88-90.

What you narrate

... if I reach her: The lines echo 10.127—32,

where Virgil tells the pilgrim, “Let your memory preserve what you have heard
against you,” since he will hear from Beatrice “the journey of your life.” In scrivo
[I am writing down] and chiosar [to gloss], the metaphor of the book of memory
reappears. Segre (1986) notes that this is one of a number of expressions in the
canto that recall the teacher—pupil relation; but this text will be glossed by a higher
teacher.
90. lady who will know: Beatrice (see the note to 10.131).

93. ready for Fortune, whatever she will: Aen. 5.710: “Quidquid erit,
superanda omnis fortuna ferendo est” [Whatever it will be, every fortune must
be surmounted by being borne].
94. pledge: Dante’s term is arra, which means, literally, a “down payment,”

a “deposit,” or “earnest money.” Note the introduction of commercial
terminology.
95-96.

let Fortune turn her wheel . . . the peasant his hoe: That is, let

the world continue on its usual uneven course, since I am constant. The expression was apparently proverbial.
99. He listens well who takes note: This would seem to be a reference to

10.127-32: the pilgrim is learning Virgil’s lesson well. (To note is to write down.)
106—7. clerks and great men of letters: The early commentators point out
that sodomy was notoriously widespread among the clergy and the learned; this
was a frequent reproach in the Middle Ages and was the basis of Alain of Lille’s
(early-thirteenth-century) poetic tract against it, the De planctu Naturae.

243

Inferno

109. Priscian ... wretched crowd: No independent tradition records that
Priscian (Byzantium and Rome, 491-518), author of the most famous Latin

grammar of the Middle Ages, was a homosexual.
110. Francesco d’Accorso: The son of one of the wealthiest jurists in history, d’Accorso (1225-1293) spent much of his career in England as the private
counselor to King Edward I.
111. such scurf: Dante’s term tigna (from Latin tinea, moth) was used to refer
to mange and other diseases that cause loss of hair; in addition to expressing disdain for the next person mentioned, it calls attention to the fact that all the
inhabitants of this circle have lost all their hair (see 16.35). See also the notes to
lines 27 and 119.
112.

him who...

ill-protended muscles: Andrea de’ Mozzi, of a powerful

Florentine banking family, was appointed bishop of Florence in 1287. Accused
of various abuses, he was transferred by the pope (the popes traditionally style
themselves Servi servorum Dei [Servants of the servants of God]), in this case
Boniface VIII, to the bishopric of Vicenza in 1294 (the Bacchiglione flows
through both Vicenza and Padua); he died in 1295. Protesi [protended] is a
Latinism from Latin protendere [to stretch forward].
117. I see new smoke rising: An allusion to Gen. 19.28: “he saw the ashes
rise up from the earth as the smoke of a furnace.”

118. People ...I must not be: The different groups of sodomites are apparently strictly separate; the group now approaching, if it is the same as the one
in the next canto, is made up of aristocrats.
119. Let my Treasure ... I ask no more: Brunetto’s Treasure is his Trésor
(see the note to line 30). That Brunetto “asks no more” has suggested to numerous commentators a parallel with Matt. 6.19—21:

Lay not up to yourselves treasures on earth: where the rust and moth consume, and where thieves break through and steal. But lay up to yourselves
treasures in heaven. . . . For where thy treasure is, there is thy heart also.
(In the Vulgate, “moth” is tinea: see the note on “scurf” in line 111.)

121. Then he turned back . . across the fields: Verona was the site of a
footrace (palio), with a bolt of green cloth as the prize. The race took place on a
wide plain outside the walls of the city; note that Brunetto is being observed
from the top of a wall as he runs across the plain.

244

Notes to Canto 15

124. the one who . . not the one who loses: Kay (1978b) was apparently
the first to note the allusion here to 1 Cor. 9.24-27 (quoted by Dante in Convivio
4.22):
Know you not that they that run in the race, all run indeed, but one

receiveth the prize? So run that you may obtain. And every one that striveth
for the mastery, refraineth himself from all things: and they indeed that
they may receive a corruptible crown; but we an incorruptible one. I therefore so run, not as at an uncertainty: I so fight, not as one beating the air:
But I chastise my body, and bring it into subjection: lest perhaps, when I
have preached to others, I myself should become a castaway.
The full allusion is further evidence that Brunetto’s sin is homosexuality and
one of the many indications that the canto can be regarded as a commentary on
the interaction of Dante and Brunetto in life. First are the reversals of direction
(strongly negative or positive): line 15 (the allusion to Lot’s wife; the pilgrim
did not turn back), line 33 (Brunetto “turns back with you”); lines 52-53 (the
pilgrim left the dark wood but was returning to it when Virgil intervened); and
line 121 (Brunetto rejoins his companions). Second is the reversal of roles:
Brunetto the teacher now walks along at the pilgrim’s skirts like a child (line 40)
and is partly instructed in how the pilgrim will reach immortality. Third is the
allusion to sexual solicitation: the plucking of the pilgrim’s garment (line 23).
If we interpret the episode as a veiled account of the relation between Dante
and Brunetto, its implication would seem to be: Dante and Brunetto met going
in opposite directions both on the arc of life and in relation to salvation; Brunetto
was sexually attracted to Dante, and Dante perhaps to him (line 23 and Additional Note 5); Dante rejected Brunetto’s advances, however, and for a time

Brunetto tured back from his sinful life and followed Dante’s example, was being
led toward salvation (this would involve an important parallel with the call to
Ugolino; see Additional Note 15); in the end he turned back to his sin. Such a

reading, though speculative, has an extensive basis in the text and is consistent
with Dante’s treatment of such material elsewhere.

245

10

Gia era in loco onde s’udia ’] rrmbombo
de l’acqua che cadea ne l’altro giro,
simile a quel che I’arnie fanno rombo,
quando tre ombre insieme si partiro,
correndo, d’una torma che passava
sotto la pioggia de l’aspro martiro.
Venian ver’ noi, e ciascuna gridava:
“Sostati tu ch’a l’abito ne sembri
essere alcun di nostra terra prava.”
Ahimé, che piaghe vidi ne’ lor membri,
ricenti e vecchie, da le fiamme incese!

13

Ancor men duol pur ch’? me ne rimembri.
A le lor grida il mio dottor s’attese;
volse ’] viso ver’ me, e: “Or aspetta,”
disse, “a costor si vuole esser cortese.

16

E se non fosse il foco che saetta
la natura del loco, i’ dicerei

che meglio stesse a te che a lor la fretta.”
19

22

25

Ricominciar, come noi restammo, ei

l’antico verso; e quando a noi fuor giunti,
fenno una rota di sé tutti e trei.
Qual sogliono i campion far nudi e unti,
avvisando lor presa e lor vantaggio
prima che sien tra lor battuti e punti:
cosi rotando, ciascuno il visaggio
drizzava a me, si che ’n contraro il collo

28

faceva ai pié contintio viaggio.
E: “Se miseria d’esto loco sollo
rende in dispetto noi e nostri prieghi,”
comincio l’uno, “e ’] tinto aspetto e brollo,

246

CANTO

16

The noise of the great cataract—the three Florentine noblemen—
denunciation of Florence—the cataract—the pilgrim’s belt—the
summoning of Geryon

Already I was in a place where one heard the
thundering of the water falling into the next circle,
like the rumbling that beehives make,
when three shades came running together out of a
herd passing by beneath the rain of the harsh
punishment.
They were coming toward us, and each was
shouting: “Stop, you who by your clothes seem to be
someone from our depraved city.”
10

Alas, what wounds I saw in their members, recent

13

and old, burned into them by the flames! It still pains
me when I remember.
At their shouts my teacher paused; he turned his
face toward me and: “Now wait,” he said, “to these

16

19

we should be courteous.
And if it were not for the fire that the nature of
the place pours down, I would say that haste would
more become you than them.”
When we stood still, they began again their
former verse; and on reaching us they made a wheel
of themselves, all three.

22

As is the custom of wrestlers, naked and oiled,

25

spying out their holds and their advantage before
they come to blows and wounds:
so they wheeled, and each kept his face toward
me, so that their necks made a constant motion

28

contrary to their feet.
And: “If the wretchedness of this vile place brings
us and our prayers to scorn,” one began, “and our
darkened, scorched appearance,

247

Inferno

nl

34

la fama nostra il tuo animo pieghi
a dirne chi tu se’, che i vivi piedi
cosi sicuro per lo ’nferno freghi.
Questi, l’orme di cui pestar mi vedi,
tutto che nudo e dipelato vada,

37

fu di grado maggior che tu non credi:
nepote fu de la buona Gualdrada;
Guido Guerra ebbe nome, e in sua vita

40

43

46

fece col senno assai e con la spada.
L’altro, ch’appresso me la rena trita,
é Tegghiaio Aldobrandi, la cui voce
nel mondo su dovria esser gradita.
E io, che posto son con loro in croce,

Jacopo Rusticucci fui, e certo
la fiera moglie piu ch’altro mi nuoce.”
S’i’ fossi stato dal foco coperto,
gittato mi sarei tra lor di sotto,
e credo che ’! dottor l’avria sofferto;

49

52

ma perch’ io mi sarei brusciato e cotto,
vinse paura la mia buona voglia
che di loro abbracciar mi facea ghiotto.
Poi cominiciai: “Non dispetto, ma doglia
la vostra condizion dentro mi fisse,

55

58

61

64

tanta che tardi tutta si dispoglia,
tosto che questo mio segnor mi disse
parole per le quali i’ mi pensai
che qual voi siete, tal gente venisse.
Di vostra terra sono, e sempre mai
Yovra di voi e li onorati nomi
con affezion ritrassi e ascoltai.
Lascio lo fele e vo per dolci pomi
promessi a me per lo verace duca;
ma ’nfino al centro pria convien ch’i’ tomi.”
“Se lungamentel’anima conduca
le membra tue,” rispuose quelli ancora,

67

“e se la fama tua dopo te luca,
cortesia e valor di se dimora
ne la nostra citta si come suole,

o se del tutto se n’é gita fora:
248

Canto 16

31

let our fame incline your spirit to tell us who you
are, who so confidently step with your living feet
through Hell.

34

This man, in whose steps you see me tread,

37

though he now goes naked and hairless, was of
higher degree than you believe:
he was the grandson of the good Gualdrada;
Guido Guerra was his name, and in his life he

accomplished much with wisdom and the sword.

40

43

46

49

52

The other, who wears the sand behind me, is

Tegghiaio Aldobrandi, whose words should have been
more pleasing in the world above.
And I, placed on the cross with them, was Iacopo
Rusticucci, and certainly my fierce wife harms me
more than anything else.”
If I had been protected from the fire, I would have
thrown myself down there among them, and I
believe my teacher would have suffered it;
but because I would have burned and cooked
myself, fear vanquished the good will that made me
greedy to embrace them.
Then I began: “Not scorn, but grief was fixed in
me by your condition, so great that it will long
endure,

ys)
58

61

64

67

as soon as my lord here said words that made me
think people such as yourselves were coming.
I am from your city, and always your works and
your honored names I have repeated and heard with
affection.
I am leaving the bitter and seek the sweet fruit
promised me by my truthful leader; but first I must
plunge as far as the center.”
“So may your soul long guide your body,” he
replied then, “and so may your fame shine after you,
tell if courtesy and valor dwell in our city as they
used to do, or if they have utterly forsaken it:

249

Inferno

70

73

76

ché Guiglielmo Borsiere, il qual si duole
con noi per poco e va la coi compagni,
assai ne cruccia con le sue parole.”
“La gente nuova e i subiti guadagni
orgoglio e dismisura han generata,
Fiorenza, in te, si che tu gia ten piagni.”
Cosi gridai con la faccia levata;
e i tre, che cio inteser per risposta,

79,

82

guardar l’un l’altro com’ al ver si guata.
“Se Daltre volte si poco ti costa,”
rispuoser tutti, “il satisfare altrui,
felice te se si parli a tua posta!
Pero, se campi d’esti luoghi bui
e torni a riveder le belle stelle,

85

88

91

94

OF;

100

103

106

quando ti giovera dicere ‘I’ fui,’
fa che di noi a la gente favelle.”
Indi rupper la rota, e a fuggirsi
ali sembiar le gambe loro isnelle.
Un amen non saria possuto dirsi
tosto cosi com’ e’ fuoro spariti;
per ch’al maestro parve di partirsi.
Io lo seguiva, e poco eravam iti,
che ’] suon de l’acqua n’era si vicino,
che per parlar saremmo a pena uditi.
Come quel fiume c’ha proprio cammino
prima dal Monte Viso ’nver’ levante
da la sinistra costa d’Apennino,
che si chiama Acquacheta suso, avante
che si divalli git: nel basso letto,
e a Forli di quel nome é vacante,
rimbomba la sovra San Benedetto
de l’Alpe, per cadere ad una scesa
ove dovria per mille esser recetto:
cosi, git: d’una ripa discoscesa,
trovammo risonar quell’acqua tinta
si che ’n poc’ ora avria l’orecchia offesa.
Io avea una corda intorno cinta,

e con essa pensai alcuna volta
prender la lonza a la pelle dipinta.
250

Canto 16

70

73

76

U2

82

for Guiglielmo Borsiere, who has been grieving

with us but a short time and goes there with our
companions, causes us much pain with his words
about it.”
“The new people and the rapid gains have
generated pride and excess, Florence, in you, so that
you already weep for it.”
So I cried with face uplifted; and the three, who
took that as my reply, looked at each other as one
looks at the truth.
“If at other times it costs you so little,” they all
replied, “to satisfy others, happy are you, if you
speak so readily!
Therefore, if you escape these dark places and go
back to see the beautiful stars, when it will be

85

88

91

94

pleasant to say, ‘I was,’
see that you speak of us to people.” Then
they broke the wheel, and their quick legs seemed
wings to their flight.
An amen could not be said more quickly than
they disappeared; so my master judged we should
move on.
I was following him, and we had not walked far,
when the sound of the water was so close to us that
we could hardly have heard each other speak.
Like that river which is first to take its own course
toward the east, after Monte Viso, on the left side of

the Apennines,
Oy

which is called Acquacheta above, before it falls
down into the low bed and loses that name at Forli,

100

103

106

as it thunders there above San Benedetto de
lAlpe, when falling in one cascade where it usually
descends by a thousand:
so down from a steep cliff we found that dark
water resounding, such that in a short while it would
have harmed our ears.
I had a cord girding me, and with it I had thought
at times to capture the leopard with the spotted hide.

Zou

Inferno

109

Poscia ch’io l’ebbi tutta da me sciolta,
si come 7] duca m’avea comandato,

porsila a lui aggroppata e ravvolta.
112

Ond’ ei si volse inver’ lo destro lato,

ilies

e alquanto di lunge da la sponda
la gitto giuso in quell’ alto burrato.
“E’ pur convien che novita risponda,”
dicea fra me medesmo, “al novo cenno

118

che 7] maestro con l’occhio si seconda.”
Ahi quanto cauti li uomini esser dienno
presso a color che non veggion pur l’ovra,
ma per entro i pensier miran col senno!

121

124

127

E] disse a me: “Tosto verra di sovra
cid ch’io attendo e che il tuo pensier sogna;
tosto convien ch’al tuo viso si scovra.”
Sempre a quel ver c’ha faccia di menzogna
de’ l’uom chiuder le labbra fin ch’el puote,
pero che sanza colpa fa vergogna;
ma qui tacer nol posso, e per le note
di questa comedia, lettor, ti giuro,

130

133

136

s’elle non sien di lunga grazia vote,
ch’i’ vidi per quell’ aere grosso e scuro
venir notando una figura in suso,
maravigliosa ad ogne cor sicuro:
si come torna colui che va giuso
talora a solver l’ancora ch’aggrappa
o scoglio o altro che nel mare é chiuso,
che ’n su si stende e da pié si rattrappa.

Zon

Canto 16

109

After I had untied it from around me, as my
leader had commanded me, I held it out to him

112

AS)

118

121

124

127

knotted and wound.
And he turned toward his right side and
somewhat far from the bank threw it down into that
deep pit.
“Some new thing must answer,” I was saying to
myself, “the strange sign that my master is following
with his eyes.”
Ah, how cautious men should be in the presence
of those who not only see our actions but with their
wisdom see our inner thoughts!
He said to me: “Soon what I expect, what your
thoughts are dreaming, will come up; soon it will be
revealed to your sight.”
Always to that truth which has the face of
falsehood one should close one’s lips as long as one
can, for without any guilt it brings shame;
but here I cannot conceal it, and by the notes of
this comedy, reader, I swear to you, so may they not
fail to find long favor,

130

that I saw, through that thick dark air, a figure
come swimming upward, fearful to the most
confident heart,

133

as one returns who at times goes down to release
an anchor caught on a rock or other thing hidden in
the sea,

136

and reaches upward as he draws in his feet.

Sg

Fae}

NOTES

1-3. Already . . . the rumbling that beehives make: The noise of the great
cataract between the circle of violence and the Malebolge is mentioned also in
16.91-105 and 17.118-—20, dominating these two transitional cantos. After the
arrival at the bottom, it is not mentioned again. The comparison of the sound to

that of beehives indicates that it is softened by distance; Dante may have expected
his readers to remember the high status granted to beehives as exemplars of
industrious commonwealths (Aen. 1.430—36; cf. Georgics 4.149-250). The food—

poison antithesis (related to the bee—spider antithesis) will be prominent in the
Malebolge, to which the cataract descends.

4-5. three shades . . . out of a herd: On the different groups identified here
and in Canto 15, see Additional Note 5.

8. by your clothes: Just as Farinata recognized the pilgrim as Florentine by
his speech, so these three do so by his characteristic Florentine garb (cf. 15.23—

24 and 40).

9. our depraved city: Such expressions describing Florence are beginning to
be taken for granted.
12. It still pains me . . . remember: Another instance of the poet’s reliving
the terrors and sorrows of the journey.
14-18. Now wait . . . you than them: Virgil emphasizes the need for courtesy, a central element in the encounter. It is quite striking that Virgil ranks the
living—and elect—pilgrim below the three Florentine sodomites, at least in the
protocol of courtesy; see Additional Note 5.

19-21. they began again . . all three: Their “former verse” is probably a
reference to the weeping mentioned in 14.20, which was interrupted by their
shouting; for the cries of the damned as song or poetry, compare 5.46 “lays,”
7.34 “meter,” 7.125 “hymn” (and see line 128). The wheel the shades now form
is a kind of dance (cf. 14.40—42, with note).

254

Notes to Canto 16

21-27. they made a wheel of themselves ... contrary to their feet:
In other words, as the three wheel in their circle and their feet take them away
from Dante, their heads turn back in order to keep him in view (each describes

two circles: one with his steps, the other with his head). As the early commentators point out, the comparison with wrestlers (the Italian campioni means
“champions”) includes implicit reference to the athletes of ancient Greece
and Rome (as in Aen. 5.421-31 or Theb. 6.847—-51); according to Lana, in
Tuscany trial by combat in minor cases could involve naked wrestling instead
of armed combat. In addition to the implicit homosexual reference, there is

probably also a comment here on the disparity of their high courtesy and
concern for the public good (the path of their heads) coexisting with their
homosexual conduct (the path of their feet); Brunetto Latini exhibits the same
paradox.

32-33. step with your living feet: Dante’s Italian is i vivi piedi freghi (literally,
rub your living feet]; the pain of setting foot on the burning sands is implied.
34—45. This man ... more than anything else: All three of these famous
Florentines of the last century are mentioned as “worthy” and as having “turned
their wits to doing well” in the pilgrim’s questioning of Ciacco in 6.79-81.

38. Guido Guerra: Grandson of Gualdrada di Bellincion Berti de’ Ravignani
(a distant kinswoman of Dante’s, wife of Count Guido the Elder, regarded by

her contemporaries as a paragon of domestic virtue), Guido Guerra (1220-1272),
as one of the Conti Guidi, was a member of one of the most powerful noble
families of Tuscany. He was one of the chief leaders of the Tuscan Guelfs
(cf. “with wisdom”) and distinguished himself (cf. “with the sword”) at the Battle
of Benevento (1266).
41. Tegghiaio Aldobrandi: Another high-ranking nobleman of Guelf persuasion (dead by 1266), who attempted to dissuade the Florentines from marching against the Sienese in what became the Battle of Montaperti.

43. placed on the cross: That is, paying the penalty for sin; this is one of
many indications in the Inferno that the punishments of the damned are distorted
reflections of the Crucifixion.
44. Jacopo Rusticucci: Apparently a member of the lesser nobility, flourished
around 1235 to 1254, still alive in 1266. Early commentators say that the hostility between him and his wife caused them to live apart and turned him against
women in general.

255

Inferno

46-51. If Ihad been protected . . . greedy to embrace them: On Dante’s
“greediness,” see Additional Note 5.

59. your works and your honored names: As Guelfs and as public benefactors. Note the contrast between the hostile initial interchange with Farinata,
a Ghibelline, in Canto 10, and the concern for fame of all these shades.

67-68. tell if courtesy and valor dwell in our city: These are central aristocratic virtues for Dante. Compare the similar concerns voiced in Purg. 8.121—
32 and 14.91-126.

For Dante’s idyllic view of earlier Florence, see Paradiso

15-16.
70. Guiglielmo Borsiere: The exact identity of this individual, who must have
died shortly before the date of the journey, is uncertain; his being mentioned in
this context and the fact that Rusticucci associates him with himself and the others
as concerned for the aristocratic virtues suggests that he, too, is a nobleman. His
surname means “purse-holder.” Boccaccio makes him an exemplar of courtesy
and liberality in Decameron 1.8.
73-75. The new people. . . weep for it: This ascription of the causes of the
current troubles in Florence is consistent with others in the poem, most notably
that offered by the pilgrim’s ancestor, Cacciaguida, in Paradiso 15-16. To some
extent it is already implied in Ciacco’s image of Florence as a bag (6.49—50).

76. So I cried with face uplifted: The pilgrim lifts his face in the direction
of Florence, on the surface of the earth, and addresses the city directly. This is a
striking instance of his gradual assumption of the role of a prophet, like a biblical one, directly addressing his contemporaries, especially his fellow Florentines,
though several other cities are apostrophized, as well as Italy as a whole and
numerous individuals. This gradually assumed prophetic role is represented as
leading directly to the writing of the poem. See also 19.88—123, 25.10-15, 26.1—
12, and 33.79-90, Purg. 6.76-151, and Par. 17.106—42.

82-84. if you escape . . . to say, ‘I was,’: The last phrase echoes the famous
line in Aen. 1.203 quoted in the note to 5.121. “Go back to see the beautiful
stars” is a striking anticipation of the last line of the Inferno.

92-105. the sound of the water . .. would have harmed our ears: The
increased loudness of the cataract is a measure of the distance Virgil and the pilgrim have walked since the opening of the canto. The steep cliff that bounds the

256

Notes to Canto 16

inner edge of the circle of violence is, with the Styx (Canto 8), the second major
division of Hell; its crossing is emphasized by covering two entire cantos (Cantos 16 and 17).

94-102. Like that river ... descends by a thousand: Monte Viso (or
Monviso) is at the northwestern limit of the Apennines. Following the
Apennines east from there (and necessarily facing south), the first river flowing down the left (i.e., the east) side of the range that had its own path (i-e.,
was not a tributary of the river Po) was in Dante’s time the Montone. Dante
thought of the Acquacheta (the name means “quiet water”) as the upper
Montone; it is now considered a tributary of the Montone. When in spate,
the Acquacheta falls in a single cataract at San Benedetto delle Alpi (see the
map of Romagna and Tuscany, p. xiv). There is a variant at line 102, discussed
in “Textual Variants.”

105. it would have harmed our ears: Dante is thinking here (as at line 2) of
the din of the famous cataracts of the Nile, which according to Cicero make the
inhabitants of the region deaf (Somnium Scipionis 5.3). Macrobius (Commentarii
2.4.14) compares their sound (negatively) to the music of the spheres.
106-14.

I had a cord girding me .. . threw it down: This cord repre-

sents one of the most famous cruxes in the poem, for which a vast number of

symbolic interpretations have been proposed (they include, among others, selfreliance, law, temperance,

chastity, “the bond of love that Nature makes,”

justice, pity, lust, and pride). One whole family of interpretation rests on the
identification of the leopard of Canto 1 with lust; this, though defended by
such scholars as Nardi (1966), seems to us excluded by the clear connection

this passage establishes between the leopard and fraud (compare the leopard’s
spotted hide with that of Geryon in Canto 17). In the pilgrim’s encounter with
the leopard (1.31—39), there is no mention of the belt nor of the intention of
capturing the beast, though the pilgrim takes “good hope” of it; and the
pilgrim’s giving up his belt here seems to have no consequences other than
attracting Geryon; there is no further reference to it, except perhaps for the
pilgrim’s girding himself with a rush (apparently signifying humility) in
Purgatorio 1 (this connection would supply support for the view that the throwing ofthe cord is a symbolic giving up ofself-reliance: but that does not make
it specific to entering the Malebolge).
The most satisfactory explanation seems to us to be that of the early commentators, who understood the pilgrim’s cord to represent fraud, in other words the
pilgrim’s own inclination to fraud (or history of it); it attracts Geryon, who hopes

to entrap him. The knotted cord would seem to reflect the iconography ofpersonified Dialectic, who holds one signifying her ability to bind men’s minds

257

Inferno

(Masciandaro 1979); thus the cord would be part of the important theme of the
relation to fraud of Dante’s poetry itself (see Ferrucci 1971 and the notes on
Geryon in Canto 17).
112. And he turned ... and ... threw it: That is, Virgil wheels on his
right side in preparation for the throw (he is evidently right-handed).
118-20. Ah, how cautious ... our inner thoughts: Preparation for the
theme of fraud.
124-26. Always to that truth . . . it brings shame: In other words, when
speaking a truth that seems a falsehood (as opposed to the lie that seems true, the
theme of the circles of fraud), one may be blamed for lying without having done
so (whereas the fraudulent, if successful, are credited with speaking the truth).
That a truth may have the face or appearance of a lie implies, of course, that a
truth may also have the face of truth, be obviously true, and be immediately
believed; this seems to be the case in lines 76—78: and note the emphasis on the

pilgrim’s face in line 76 (the metaphorics of face and belly are discussed in Additional Note 13).

127-29. by the notes of this comedy . . . long favor: This is the third of
the seven apostrophes of the reader in the Inferno (see the note to 8.94-96). Within
the fiction, the oath contributes effectively to the mysterious and threatening
emergence of the figure of Geryon, but it is important for other reasons as well.
It contains the first appearance in the poem of what amounts to its title (the
addition of the epithet “divine” became customary in the sixteenth century) (see
the note to 21.2).

The “notes” by which the poet swears are, of course, the words of the poem
(cf. the note to lines 19—20); it was customary to swear by what one held most

dear (plausibly the case for Dante). That the poet swears to what is obviously a
fiction has excited comment that has not always been attentive to the nature of
the “truth” Dante claims for the figure of Geryon; the relation of the “face of

falsehood” here to the true-seeming face of Geryon is discussed also in the notes
to 17.10—27; here we may observe that in this oath, and by naming his poem
here, close to the center of the Inferno, the poet is both asserting the importance
of his analysis of fraud and problematizing the fictional-allegorical mode of the
poem. See Additional Note 13.
130-36. Isaw .. . draws in his feet: The vivid description of Geryon’s flight
describes it in terms of swimming, as the Florentines’ running was compared to
flight (line 87).

132. fearful: The Italian is maravigliosa [causing wonder or alarm]; compare with
Brunetto’s exclamation, 15.24.

258

Notes to Canto 16

133-36. as one returns ... draws in his feet: A vivid evocation of the
motions of a swimmer. It should be remembered that Geryon is swimming/flying up from very deep in Hell, figurally the abyss, or the depths of the sea. Geryon
is discussed in the notes to Canto 17.

299

CANTO

hy

“Ecco la fiera con la coda aguzza,
che passa i monti e rompe i muri e I’armi!
Ecco colei che tutto ’] mondo appuzza!”
Si comincio lo mio duca a parlarmi;
e accennolle che venisse a proda
vicino al fin d’1 passeggiati marmi.
E quella sozza imagine di froda
sen venne, e arrivo la testa e ’1 busto,
10

13

16

19

ma ’n su la riva non trasse la coda.
La faccia sua era faccia d’uom giusto,
tanto benigna avea di fuor la pelle,
e d’un serpente tutto l’altro fusto;
due branche avea pilose insin l’ascelle;
lo dosso e ’] petto e ambedue le coste
dipinti avea di nodi e di rotelle:
con piu color, sommesse e sovraposte,
non fer mai drappi Tartari né Turchi,
né fuor tai tele per Aragne imposte.
Come talvolta stanno a riva i burchi,

che parte sono in acqua e parte in terra,
e come 1a tra li Tedeschi lurchi
22

25

28

lo bivero s’assetta a far sua guerra:
cosi la fiera pessima si stava
su l’orlo che di pietra e ’] sabbion serra.
Nel vano tutta sua coda guizzava,
torcendo in st la venenosa forca
ch’a guisa di scorpion la punta armava.
Lo duca disse: “Or convien che si torca
la nostra via un poco insino a quella
bestia malvagia che cola si corca.”

260

GANGLOLL/,
Geryon, the “filthy image of fraud” —the usurers—descent on
Geryon’s back

10

“Behold the beast with the pointed tail, that passes
through mountains and pierces walls and armor!
Behold the one that makes the whole world stink!”
So my leader began speaking to me; and he
gestured to it to come ashore near the end of our
marble pathway.
And that filthy image of fraud came over and
beached its head and chest, but did not draw up its
tail as far as the bank.
Its face was that of a just man, so kindly seemed
its outer skin, and the rest of its torso was that of a

13

16

serpent;
it had two paws, hairy to the armpits; it had back
and breast and both sides painted with knots and
little wheels:
with more colors, in weave and embroidery, did

never Tartars nor Turks make cloths, nor did
19

22

25

28

Arachne string the loom for such tapestries.
As skiffs lie on the shore at times, partly in water
and partly on land, and as there among the drunken
Germans
the beaver positions itself to wage its war: so the
wicked beast rested on the rim of stone that encloses
the sand.
In the emptiness all its tail was wriggling, twisting
upward the poisoned fork that armed its tip like a
scorpion’s.
My leader said: “Now our path must bend a little
toward the evil beast that lies over there.”

261

Inferno
v

31

34

SY

Peré scendemmo a la destra mammella
e diece passi femmo in su lo stremo,
per ben cessar la rena e la fiammella.
E quando noi a lei venuti semo,
poco pit oltre veggio in su la rena
gente seder propinqua al loco scemo.
Quivi ’] maestro: “Accio che tutta piena
esperienza d’esto giron porti,”
mi disse, “va, e vedi la lor mena.

40

Li tuoi ragionamenti sian 1a corti;
mentre che torni, parlero con questa,

43

46

49

52

che ne conceda i suoi omeri forti.”
Cosi ancor su per la strema testa
di quel settimo cerchio tutto solo
andai, dove sedea la gente mesta.
Per li occhi fora scoppiava lor duolo;
di qua, di 1a soccorrien con le mani
quando a’ vapori, e quando al caldo suolo:
non altrimenti fan di state i cani
or col ceffo or col pié, quando son morsi
o da pulci o da mosche o da tafani.
Poi che nel viso a certi li occhi porsi,
ne’ quali ’] doloroso foco casca,
non ne conobbi alcun; ma io m’accorsi

55

58

61

che dal collo a ciascun pendea una tasca
ch’avea certo colore e certo segno,
e quindi par che ’] loro occhio si pasca.
E com’ io riguardando tra lor vegno,
in una borsa gialla vidi azzurro
che d’un leone avea faccia e contegno.
Poi, procedendo di mio sguardo il curro,

64

vidine un’altra come sangue rossa,
mostrando un’oca bianca pit che burro.
E un che d’una scrofa azzurra e grossa
segnato avea lo suo sacchetto bianco,
mi disse: “Che fai tu in questa fossa?

67

Or te ne va; e perché se’ vivo anco,

sappi che ’] mio vicin Vitaliano
sedera qui dal mio sinistro fianco.
262

Canto 17

31

Therefore we descended toward the right breast
and made ten paces to the edge, to be well beyond
the sand and the flames.

34

And when we had reached it, a little further, on

37

40

43

46

49

the sand, I see people sitting near the empty place.
There my master said to me: “That you may carry
away full experience of this subcircle, go, and see
their behavior.
Let your speech there be brief; until you return, I
will speak with this beast, that it may grant us its
strong shoulders.”
So once more along the outer edge of that seventh
circle I walked all alone, where the mournful people
were sitting.
Through their eyes burst forth their pain; here,
there, they sought remedy with their hands at times
against the fire, at times against the hot ground;
not otherwise do the dogs behave in the summer,
now with muzzle, now with foot, when they are

52

55

58

61

64

67

bitten by fleas or gnats or horseflies.
When I turned my eyes to their faces, on which
the painful fire falls down, I recognized none; but I
perceived
that from the neck of each hung a bag of a special
color, with a special emblem, and their eyes seem to
feed there.
And as I come gazing among them, on a yellow
purse I saw blue that had the shape and bearing of a
lion.
Then, proceeding further with my scrutiny, I saw
another, red as blood, displaying a goose whiter than
butter.
And one who had his little white sack signed with
a fat blue sow, said to me: “What are you doing in
this ditch?
Now go away; and since you are alive, too, know
that my neighbor Vitaliano will sit here at my left
flank.

263

Inferno
v

70

73

76

79

82

Con questi Fiorentin son padoano:
spesse fiate mi ’ntronan li orecchi
gridando: ‘Vegna ’] cavalier sovrano,
che rechera la tasca con tre becchi!””
Qui distorse la bocca e di fuor trasse
la lingua, come bue che ’] naso lecchi.
E io, temendo no ’| piu star crucciasse
lui che di poco star m’avea ’mmonito,
torna’mi in dietro da l’anime lasse.
Trova’ il duca mio ch’era salito
gia su la groppa del fiero animale,
e disse a me: “Or sie forte e ardito:
omai si scende per si fatte scale.
Monta dinanzi, ch’i’ voglio esser mezzo,

85

88

Of

si che la coda non possa far male.”
Qual é colui che si presso ha ’] riprezzo
de la quartana c’ha gia l’unghie smorte
e triema tutto pur guardando ’! rezzo:
tal divenn’ io a le parole porte;
ma vergogna mi fé le sue minacce,
che innanzi a buon segnor fa servo forte.
I’ m/’assettai in su quelle spallacce;
“Si,” volli dir, ma la voce non venne

com’ io credetti: “Fa che tu m’abbracce.”
94

Ma esso, ch’altra volta mi sovvenne
ad altro forse, tosto ch’i’ montai

con le braccia m’avvinse e mi sostenne;
97

e disse: “Gerion, moviti omai;

100

le rote larghe, e lo scender sia poco:
pensa la nova soma che tu hai.”
Come la navicella esce di loco
in dietro in dietro, si quindi si tolse;

e poi ch’al tutto si senti a gioco,
103

la ’v’ era ’] petto, la coda rivolse,

106

e quella tesa, come anguilla, mosse,
e con le branche l’aere a sé raccolse.
Maggior paura non credo che fosse
quando Fetonte abbandono li freni,

per che ’I ciel, come pare ancor, si cosse,
264

Canto 17

70

With these Florentines I am a Paduan: often they
thunder in my ears shouting, ‘Let the reigning knight
come down,

73

who will bring the bag with the three goats.’”” Here
he twisted his mouth and stuck out his tongue, like an

76

ox licking its snout.
And I, fearing lest a longer stay might displease
him who had warned me to be brief, turned back,

away from those weary souls.
7D)

82

I found my leader had climbed already onto the
fierce animal’s rump, and he told me: “Now be strong
and bold:
henceforth we descend by stairs like these. Mount
in front, for I wish to be between, so that its tail

85

88

91

94

can do no harm.”
Like one whose fit of the quartan fever is so close
that his nails are already pale and he trembles all
over merely looking at the shade:
so I became at the words I heard; but shame made

its threats, that makes a servant bold in the presence
ofa good lord.
I positioned myself on those monstrous shoulders;
“Yes,” I wanted to say, but my voice did not come as |
expected: “Be sure to hold me.”
But he, who had supported me at other times, in
other dangers, as soon as I mounted clasped and
braced me with his arms;

97

100

and he said: “Geryon, now move; make your
wheelings large, your descent slow: consider the new
weight you carry.”
As a little boat moves from its place backward,
backward, so he moved thence; and when he felt

himself entirely free,
103

he turned his tail where his breast had been, and,

106

extending it, he moved it like an eel’s, and gathered
the air to himself with his paws.
I believe there was no greater fear when Phaéthon
abandoned the reins, so that the sky was scorched, as

still appears,
265

Inferno
109

ii?

115

118

né quando Icaro misero le reni
senti spennar per la scaldata cera,
gridando il padre a lui, “Mala via tieni!”
che fu la mia, quando vidi ch’’ era
ne l’aere d’ogne parte, e vidi spenta
ogne veduta fuor che de la fera,
Ella sen va notando lenta lenta;

rota e discende, ma non me n’accorgo
se non che al viso e di sotto mi venta.
Io sentia gia da la man destra il gorgo
far sotto noi un orribile scroscio,

121

124

per che con li occhi ’n giv la testa sporgo.
Allor fu’ io pit timido a lo stoscio,
pero ch’1’ vidi fuochi e senti’ pianti;
ond’ io tremando tutto mi raccoscio.
E vidi poi, ché nol vedea davanti,

lo scendere e ’] girar per li gran mali
che s’appressavan da diversi canti.
127

Come ’| falcon ch’é stato assai su |’ali,

che sanza veder logoro o uccello
fa dire al falconiere: ““Omé, tu cali!”
130

133

136

discende lasso onde si move isnello,

per cento rote, e da lunge si pone
dal suo maestro, disdegnoso e fello:
cosi ne puose al fondo Gerione,
al pié al pie de la stagliata rocca,
e, discarcate le nostre persone,
si dileguo come da corda cocca.

266

Canto 17

109

nor when the wretched Icarus felt his loins
unfeathering because of the heated wax, as his father
shouted to him, “You’re on a bad course!”’

ii

LS

118

121

124

127

130

than was mine, when I saw that I was in the air

on every side, and every sight put out save that of
the beast.
It goes along swimming slowly, slowly; it wheels
and descends, but I perceive its motion only by the
wind on my face from below.
I could already hear at my right hand the torrent
making a horrible roar beneath us, and so I lean out
my head, looking down.
Then I became more afraid of falling, for I saw
fires and heard weeping; so that all trembling I
huddled back.
And then I saw what I had not seen before, our

descending and turning against the great evils that
came closer on every side.
As when a falcon has been long on the wing and,
without seeing lure or prey, makes the falconer say,
“Oh me, you are coming down!”
descending weary to the place it swiftly left, with
a hundred circlings, and lands far from its master,

133

full of disdain and spite:
so Geryon placed us on the bottom, at the very
foot of the vertical rock, and, our persons unloaded,

136

disappeared like the notch from the bowstring.

i

267

NOTES

1-3. Behold the beast ... the whole world stink: This unusual canto
opening serves partly to heighten interest in the still undescribed creature that
came swimming up at the end of the last canto. It also calls attention to the fact
that, like Cantos 8 and 9, this canto forms a major transition between divisions

of Hell, for we now move from the circle of violence to the two circles of fraud
(simple fraud and treacherous fraud [see 11.52—66]; for the new elaborateness of
canto openings in the Maiebolge, see the note on 18.1—18).
Line 7 makes it explicit that Geryon is a personification of fraud. Fraud makes
all physical barriers and defenses (mountains, walls, and armor) useless. It makes
“the whole world stink” primarily with the venom of its scorpion-like tail (lines
25-27); this is a submerged reference to fraud as poison (truth is the food of the
soul-mind, deception its poison; see Additional Note 13).

5. come ashore: Continues the nautical terminology of 16.131—36. See also
the notes to lines 8—9, 19-24, and 100—101.

6. our marble pathway: That is, the margin of the river of blood, on which
the pilgrim and Virgil are standing, first mentioned as their pathway in 14.84
(see the note to 15.4—11).
8. beached its head and chest: See the note to lines 19—24; another nautical

image.

10-27. Its face .. . like a scorpion’s: The description of Geryon draws on
a wide variety of sources, such as the description in Apoc. 9.7—10 of the plague
of locusts: “And their faces were as the faces of men. . . . And they had tails like
to scorpions, and there were stings in their tails.” (Geryon’s being called a beast
in line 1 may also recall the beast of Apoc. 11.7.) Dante also draws on the fabulous Manticore described by Pliny and by Brunetto Latini in Trésor 1.192, which
combines parts of man, lion, and scorpion; and contemporary, especially
Franciscan, discussions of the Antichrist (Friedman 1972). Geryon is a triple hybrid
(the first in the poem; previous hybrids have been double), whose successive
parts—man, beast (bear?), and serpent—descend on the scale of nature (the scorpion was classed as a worm) (see the note to line 97).

In Geryon, the pilgrim sees the process of fraud spatially, as it were from outside time (in itself an apocalyptic perspective). The succession of Geryon’s parts
is a spatial representation of the chronological sequence of a fraudulent “deal”:
the honest appearance engages initial trust, the bright colors and little wheels
complicate and confuse, and the end of the process brings the sting, whether of
loss or of death; at some point the claws begin acquiring.

268

Notes to Canto 17

10. Its face was that of a just man: In Convivio 4.12.3, Dante mentions
“the traitor, who, in the face he puts forward, shows as a friend, but under it

conceals his enmity” (cf. 16.124—26, 127-29, with notes). It was apparently a
common belief in Dante’s time that the scorpion’s face resembled a human face.
12. its torso was that of a serpent: Like Cerberus, “the great worm” (6.22),
and Minos (5.7—12), Geryon is part snake. The serpent was of course the first deceiver (Genesis 3); compare also the dragon of the Apocalypse (Apoc. 12.2—3 and
12:9).
14-18. it had back and breast . . . for such tapestries: Geryon’s brightly
“colored” (dipinti) torso recalls the “gaily painted hide” (1.42) of the leopard
(cf. 16.108, “painted skin,” pelle dipinta) and provides the basis of the most probable identification of the leopard, that it represents fraud.
The association of fraud (and the telling of tales) with spinning and weaving
is ancient and virtually universal (compare such English expressions as “pull the
wool over someone’s eyes”). In Ovid’s Metamorphoses (6.1-145) Arachne challenges Minerva to a weaving contest. While Minerva makes a tapestry showing
the benefactions of the gods, Arachne’s (which Ovid says. is just as skillful as
Minerva’s) shows the disguises, deceptions, and crimes of the gods. The envious

and enraged goddess strikes Arachne and destroys her work; Arachne attempts
to hang herself but is changed by Minerva into a spider. In the medieval allegorical interpretations of Ovid, Arachne is identified as the devil.
Dante’s “weave and embroidery” (line 16) and “painted” (line 15) refer to

tapestries, for both Minerva and Arachne weave colored backgrounds and then
embroider figures with gold thread (Met. 6.23: “pingebat acu” [she painted with
the needle] and 6.68-69):
illic et lentum filis immittitur aurum,
et vetus in tela deducitur argumentum.
[the pliant gold is inserted among the threads,
and the old story is drawn into the weave.]
For Arachne and painting, see Barkan 1988.

19-24. As skiffs ... the sand: As in lines 7-9, Dante here emphasizes that
the beast is only halfway on the shore; half of his body remains in the void. We
are now close to the midpoint of the Inferno; if we count Geryon, more than half
of the Inferno is devoted to the sins of fraud. In terms of the body analogy (see
Additional Note 13), this midpoint is the division between chest and abdomen.

22. the beaver positions itself to wage its war: That the beaver used its
tail to attract fish which it then caught was a widespread belief.
27. like a scorpion’s: Compare Ovid, Met. 2.195-97:

269

Inferno

Est locus, in geminos ubi bracchia concavat arcus
Scorpius et cauda flexisque utrimque lacertis
porrigit in spatium signorum membra duorum.
[There is a place, where Scorpius curves in double arcs
his arms, and, with tail and legs curving on both sides,
extends his members over two signs of heaven.]
For the tale of Phaéthon, from which this passage is drawn, see the note to lines
106-11.

31. toward the right breast: For similar expressions, see 12.97, 15.98. Since
the river of blood lies to their left, there is no other direction of descent from

the high margin: everything they have seen from it (all the souls of this circle so
far, and Geryon) has been to their right (see the note to 9.132).
35. a little further: That is, still to the night.

40-41. I will speak with this beast: Dante opens a parenthesis here, marked
by the pilgrim’s turns to and from the right: the pilgrim returns to the beast at line
79; within the parenthesis is the account of the usurers. Compare the “border”

zones at the beginning of the poem (Limbo, the neutrals) and between incontinence
and violence (the wrathful and slothful, the heretics) with the border of the circle
of violence here, in a sense already within the orbit of “the image of fraud.”

45. the mournful people were sitting: The third of the groups listed in
14.22-24. The sitting posture suits the idleness of usurers, whose “work”
is done
by their money (cf. line 78).

49. dogs behave in the summer: The commentators note the disparaging
comparison of the usurers to animals here and in line 75, and in the animals on
their associated bags (lines 60, 63, 64, 73).

51. gnats or horseflies: The Italian literally means “flies and horseflies.”
54. I recognized none: Several of these figures have been identified, but
Dante’s point lies partly in the fact that conviction for usury often brought not
only civil and religious penalties but also public infamy, which extended to children and relatives.
55. a bag of a special color: Contemporary accounts prove that bags were
carried by moneylenders and placed on their changing tables (Salvemini 1901—
1902); visual representations of Hell (e.g., the Last Judgment in the Scrovegni
Chapel in Padua) typically show usurers holding bags.

270

Notes to Canto 17

57. their eyes seem to feed there: Compare Eccles. 4.8: “neither are his
eyes satisfied with riches.” The obsession of the usurers with both coats of arms
and moneybags focuses Dante’s condemnation of a class, many of whose members were recently knighted, that owed its wealth and influence to the practice
of usury (see the note to lines 64-65). Dante’s verb here, pascere, is normally used
of the grazing of animals.
59. on a yellow purse ... a lion: The device of the Gianfigliazzi family of
Florence, prominent Guelfs after 1215 and followers of the Black Guelfs after 1300.
The figure here is perhaps Catello di Rosso Gianfigliazzi, who practiced usury in
France and became a knight on returning to Florence; he was dead by 1298.
62-63. red as blood . . . whiter than butter: The Ghibelline Obriachi were
a Florentine family of the high aristocracy residing in the part of the Oltrarno
that includes the modern Via dei Bardi. Closely allied with the Uberti, Farinata’s

family, they were well known as bankers and money changers.
64-65. sack signed with a fat blue sow: A blue sow big with young, rampant, was the device of the wealthy Scrovegni (from scrofa, sow) family of Padua
(see line 70). Reginaldo Scrovegni, who died in 1290, made an immense for-

tune; his son Arrico obtained a knighthood. Arrico financed the Scrovegni Chapel
at Padua, frescoed by Giotto in the first decade of the fourteenth century; it is

conceivable that Dante, who seems to have been in Padua at an appropmiate time,
helped with the planning.
68. my neighbor . . . at my left flank: This expected usurer (the only one
given a name), is usually identified with Vitaliano del Dente, who married a

daughter of Reginaldo Scrovegni and served as podesta of several cities; there is
little evidence, beyond this passage, for his having been a usurer. Scrovegni’s
phraseology may evoke the placing of the wicked thief, and of the reprobate at
the Last Judgment, at Christ’s left.
72-73. Let the reigning knight . . . three goats: Three goats in a gold field
was the device of the Buiamonte family. Giovanni di Buiamonte de’ Becchi was
Gonfaloniere della Giustizia (commissioner and chief of police) of Florence in
1293, when only newly a knight.

74-75.

Here he twisted . . . licking its snout: The usurer’s grotesque ges-

ture (he is the one with the sow on his bag) expresses both reduction to bestial-

ity and a weird sluggishness perhaps associated with their sin.
81. Now be strong and bold: See 2.14—15, with note.

82. henceforth we descend by stairs like these: The figure of the “chain”
or “ladder of being” is all but explicit (see the notes on 2.52-117 and 11.18, and
Introduction, pp. 18-20). Geryon is a ladder not only in providing transport,

Died

Inferno

but by representing in his body the descent from the human to the lowest of the
beasts, as Minos’s tail mapped the coils of Hell. See also 34.82, 119 and notes.
86-87. quartan fever ... at the shade: Tertian and quartan fevers are forms
of malaria whose attacks recur every forty-eight and seventy-two hours, respectively. The pilgrim’s symptoms echo those of the frightened Phaéthon (Met. 2.200):
“‘mentis inops gelida formidine” [his mind failed, frozen with fear]; see also Met.
2.180: “palluit, et subito genua intremuere timore” [he turned pale, and suddenly
his knees shook with fear]. For Phaéthon, see also the note to lines 106-14.

96. clasped and braced me: As in lines 83-84, this may be taken allegorically, indicating the wayfarer protected by his guide, reason, from the threat of
fraud. For Virgil carrying the pilgrim bodily, see 19.43—44, 124 and 23.49-51,
24.22-24.

97. Geryon: Only now is the “image of fraud” given a name, that of one of
the classical monsters defeated by Hercules (like Cerberus in Canto 6; other

defeated opponents of Hercules are Cacus, in Canto 25, and Antaeus, in Canto
31). According to Vergil, Geryon is triple-bodied (Aen. 6.289: “forma tricorporis
umbrae” [the form of the triple-bodied shade]). By making him a triple hybrid,
Dante metamorphoses Geryon into a fantastic creature like the classical Chimera
(lion, goat, and serpent), mentioned along with Geryon at Aen. 6.288.

98-99. your wheelings large, your descent slow: Geryon is to avoid the
extremes of too narrow an arc or of too precipitous a descent. For the relation of
these instructions to those given to Phaéthon and Icarus, see the note to lines
106-11 and Additional Note 6, which also discusses the relation of Geryon’s

motion to that of the sun. See also 34.96 and note.
99. consider the new weight you carry: A reference to the pilgrim’s physical body (see 8.27, with note). Benvenuto de’ Rambaldi began the tradition of
attributing a metaliterary implication to the pilgrim’s flight on Geryon, associating the “new weight” with the new subject matter of the circles of fraud.
Current criticism tends to see the flight on Geryon as metaphorical for the entire poem (Ferrucci 1971; Barolini 1992).

100-101. As a little boat . . . he moved thence: The figure of Geryon as a
boat (see lines 5, 19) is continued. Ovid, in Met. 2.163—66, compares the chariot of

Phaéthon (see next note) to a boat with insufficient ballast (Brownlee 1984), and at
Met. 8.228 compares Icarus’s wings to oars. For this comparison (used to illustrate
metaphor in medieval handbooks of rhetoric), see the note to 26.125; the parallel

between Ulysses’ and the pilgrim’s journeys begins to be established here.

106-11. I believe ... bad course: To describe the pilgrim’s fear of riding
on the back of Geryon, Dante draws on a pair of Ovidian myths that were tra-

P57

Notes to Canto 17

ditional examples of overreaching: in the first (Met. 1.747—2.332), Phaéthon
requests, as proof of his divine origin, that his father Helios (the sun) allow him

to drive the chariot of the sun for one day. Losing control of the horses, Phaéthon
allows the chariot to veer from its track and burns both the heavens, leaving the

Milky Way as a scorch mark (cf. lines 107—8; Dante mentions the Milky Way in
Convivio 2.14), and the earth, making the Sahara Desert (Met. 2.237-38; see

24.85-90, with note), until felled by a lightning bolt from Jove.
The second myth (Met. 8.183—259) is that of Icarus, the son of Daedalus the
craftsman. Escaping with him from the labyrinth of King Minos (see 12.12, 25
and notes) on wings fashioned by his father, Icarus disregards his father’s advice
to steer a middle course between sky and sea (hence the cry of Dante’s line 111,
which does not appear in Ovid) and flies too close to the sun, whose heat melts
the wax holding his wings together; he falls into the sea and drowns. Mention of
Icarus completes a series of references to Cretan myth in the middle area of Hell
(see the note to 12.12 and Additional Notes 3 and 6).
106, 110. when Phaéthon

abandoned

..., when the wretched Icarus

felt: As the commentators point out, Dante chooses the critical moments: when

Phaéthon, terrified by the Scorpion (with a stinging tail, like Geryon), “‘abandons the reins” (Met. 2.200: lora remisit), and when Icarus, climbing too high,
feels the wax melting (8.226: “mollit odoratas, pennarum vincula, ceras’” [it softened the sweet-smelling wax, the bonds of his wings]).
120-26. I lean out . . . came closer on every side: The vividness and accuracy of Dante’s imagining of night flight, particularly of the perception of
descent by the sight of the lights on the ground, are striking.
127-32. As when a falcon . . . spite: The second of many images in the poem
drawn from falconry (in the Inferno, see 3.117, 22.128—41, and 33.22). The falcon
of this simile, returning without prey and unbidden by its master, is both like
and unlike Geryon, who is bearing the load of the pilgrim, but not doing so
willingly. The simile and the tercet that follows, juxtaposing Geryon’s turnings
at Virgil’s bidding (see lines 97-99) with the direct flight ofan arrow (line 136),
expresses the reluctance of Geryon’s obedience to Virgil, the strongest argument
for the view of some commentators that Geryon—and his master—have been
defrauded of expected prey.

132. its master: The point of view of the simile is that of the falconer (line
129); it is implied that the falconer is Satan, Geryon’s lord (cf. 3.117).
136. like the notch from the bowstring: The comparison of directed motion
to the flight of an arrow is frequent in Dante’s work and in thirteenth-century
writing on physics generally; see Aquinas, Summa theol. 1a, q. 1, a. 2: “thus an
arrow directs itselfto its determined end because it is set in motion by the bowman, who directs his action to an end” (cf. 8.13—14, on Phlegyas).

C4

CANTO

10

13

16

19

18

Luogo é in inferno detto Malebolge,
tutto di pietra di color ferrigno,
come la cerchia che dintorno il volge.
Nel dritto mezzo del campo maligno
vaneggia un pozzo assai largo e profondo,
di cui suo loco dicero l’ordigno.
Quel cinghio che rimane adunque é tondo
tral pozzo e ’| pié de l’alta ripa dura,
e ha distinto in dieci valli il fondo.
Quale, dove per guardia de le mura
piu e piu fossi cingon i castelli,
la parte dove son rende figura:
tale imagine quivi facean quelli;
e come a tai fortezze da’ lor sogli
a la ripa di fuor son ponticelli:
cosi da imo de la roccia scogli
movien che ricidien li argini e’ fossi
infino al pozzo che i tronca e raccogli.
In questo luogo, de la schiena scossi
di Gerion, trovammoci; e ’! poeta
tenne a sinistra, e io dietro mi mossi.

ae

A la man destra vidi nova pieta,
novo tormento e novi frustatori,

25

28

di che la prima bolgia era repleta.
Nel fondo erano ignudi i peccatori;
dal mezzo in qua ci venien verso ’] volto,
di la con noi, ma con passi maggiori:

come i Roman per l’essercito molto,
l’anno del giubileo, su per lo ponte
hanno a passar la gente modo colto,

274

CANTO

18

Eighth circle: simple fraud—the plan of Malebolge—first bolgia:
panders and seducers—second bolgia: flatterers

There is in Hell a place called Malebolge, made of
stone the color of iron, like the circle that encloses it.

In the exact center of the evil field there gapes a
broad, deep pit, whose fashion I will tell suo loco.
The belt that remains, then, is round, between the

10

13

16

IS,

22

10,

pit and the foot of the high hard bank, and its
bottom is divided into ten valleys.
As, where to guard the walls many moats gird
castles, their placing traces a pattern:
such an image these valleys made there; and as
from the thresholds of such fortresses bridges lead to
the outside bank:
so, from the base of the cliff, ridges moved that
cut across the banks and the ditches, as far as the pit
that truncates and gathers them in.
In this place, shaken from Geryon’s back, we
found ourselves; and my poet moved toward the left,
and I followed him.
On my right hand I saw new cause for pity, new
torments and new wielders of the whip, of which the first
pocket was full.
At the bottom were the sinners, naked; on this side

of the midpoint they came with their faces toward
us, on the other side they went with us, but with longer
steps:
as the Romans, the year of the Jubilee, because of
the great throng, found a way to move people across
the bridge,

Hid

Inferno

ol

che da I’un lato tutti hanno la fronte
verso ’] castello e vanno a Santo Pietro,

34

37

da l’altra sponda vanno verso ’] monte.
Di qua, di la, su per lo sasso tetro
vidi demon cornuti con gran ferze
che li battien crudelmente di retro.
Ahi come facean lor levar le berze
a le prime percosse! gia nessuno
le seconde aspettava né le terze.

40

Mentr’ io andava, li occhi miei in uno

furo scontrati, e i0 si tosto dissi:
43

46

“Gia di veder costui non son digiuno.”
Per ch’ io a figurarlo i piedi affissi;
e ’] dolce duca meco si ristette
e assentio ch’alquanto in dietro gissi.
E quel frustato celar si credette
bassando ’] viso; ma poco li valse,

49

52

ch’io dissi: “O tu che l’occhio a terra gette,
se le fazion che porti non son false,
Venedico se’ tu Caccianemico.
Ma che ti mena a si pungenti salse?”
Ed elli a me: “Mal volontier lo dico,

ma sforzami la tua chiara favella,

61

che mi fa sovvenir del mondo antico.
I’ fui colui che la Ghisolabella
condussi a far la voglia del marchese,
come che suoni la sconcia novella.
E non pur io qui piango bolognese;
anzi n’é questo loco tanto pieno
che tante lingue non son ora apprese
a dicer sipa tra Savena e Reno;

64

récati a mente il nostro avaro seno.”
Cosi parlando il percosse un demonio

D5

58

e se di cid vuoi fede o testimonio,

de la sua scuriada, e disse: “Via,
67

ruffian! qui non son femmine da conio.”
I’ mi raggiunsi con la scorta mia;
poscia con pochi passi divenimmo
la ’v’ uno scoglio de la ripa uscia.
276

Canto 18

31

34

37
40
43

46

for on one side they are all turned toward the
Castle and are going toward Saint Peter, and on the
other they are going toward the mountain.
Here and there, along the dark rock, I saw horned
demons with great whips, who were beating them
from behind.
Ah, how the first blow made each lift his heels!

none waited for the second or the third.
As I was walking, my eye fell on one; immediately
I said: “I am certainly not fasting for sight of him.”
And so | stopped my pace to make out his
features; and my sweet leader stopped with me and
consented that I walk a little backward.
And that whipped one thought to hide by
lowering his face; but it little availed him, for I said:

49

52

55
58

61

64

67

“O you who cast your eyes to the earth,
if your features are not false, you are Venedico
Caccianemico. But what leads you to such pungent
sauces?”
And he to me: “Unwilling I say it, but your clear
speech compels me, reminding me of the former
world.
It was I who induced Ghisolabella to do the
marchese’s will, however they tell the shameful tale.
And not only I weep here from Bologna, for this
place is so full of us that not so many tongues have
learned
to say sipa now between the Savena and the
Reno; and if you want proof or testimony of that,
bring to mind our greedy breast.”
As he was speaking a demon struck him with his
scourge, and said: “Away, pimp! here there are no
females to coin.”
I caught up with my guide; then after a few steps
we came to where a ridge went out from the bank.

Ze

Inferno

70

73

76

79

Assai leggeramente quel salimmo;
e volti a destra su per la sua scheggia
da quelle cerchie etterne ci partimmo.
Quando noi fummo 1a dov’ el vaneggia
di sotto per dar passo a li sferzati,
lo duca disse: “Attienti, e fa che feggia
lo viso in te di quest’ altri mal nati
ai quali ancor non vedesti la faccia,
pero che son con noi insieme andati.”
Del vecchio ponte guardavam la traccia
che venia verso noi da |’altra banda,

e che la ferza similmente scaccia.
82

85

88

of

94

OT

100

103

106

E 1] buon maestro, sanza mia dimanda,

mi disse: “Guarda quel grande che vene,
e per dolor non par lagrime spanda:
quanto aspetto reale ancor ritene!
Quelli é Iason, che per cuore e per senno
li Colchi del monton privati fene.
Ello passo per l’isola di Lenno
poi che l’ardite femmine spietate
tutti li maschi loro a morte dienno.
Ivi con segni e con parole ornate
Isifile inganno, la giovinetta
che prima avea tutte l’altre ingannate.
Lasciolla quivi gravida, soletta:

tal colpa a tal martiro lui condanna,
e anche di Medea si fa vendetta.
Con lui sen va chi di tal parte inganna;
e questo basti de la prima valle
sapere e di color che ’n sé assanna.”
Gia eravam 1a ’ve lo stretto calle
con l’argine secondo s’incrocicchia
e fa di quello ad un altr’ arco spalle.
Quindi sentimmo gente che si nicchia
ne l’altra bolgia e che col muso scuffa,
e sé medesma con le palme picchia.
Le ripe eran grommate d’una muffa,
per l’alito di git che vi s’appasta,
che con li occhi e col naso facea zuffa.
278

Canto 18

d3

Easily we climbed it, and, turning to the right
along its spine, we left those eternal circlings.
When we were above where it gapes to give
passage to the whipped ones, my leader said: “Wait,
and let the sight

76

of these other ill-born ones strike you, many of

70

79

82

85
88
91

94

Oi],

100

103

106

whose faces you have not seen, since they have
walked together with us.”
From the old bridge we looked down on the file
that was coming toward us on the other side,
likewise driven by the lash.
And my good master, without my asking, said:
“Look at that tall one coming, who does not seem to
be shedding any tears for the pain:
how regal is his bearing still! That is Jason, who
by courage and wit robbed the Colchians of the ram.
He visited the island of Lemnos after the bold,

pitiless women had put all their males to death.
There with tokens and elaborate words he
deceived Hypsipyle, the young girl who, before that,
had deceived all the other women.
He left her there pregnant and alone: such guilt
condemns him to this punishment, and also for
Medea vengeance is taken.
Those walk with him who deceive in that
direction; and let this be enough to know about the
first ditch and those it grinds in its teeth.”
Already we had come to where the narrow
passage intersects the second bank and makes of it
the support for another arch.
From there we heard people whimpering in the
next pocket, and puffing with their snouts, and
striking themselves with their palms.
The banks were encrusted with a mold from the
breath from below that condenses there, which

assailed both eyes and nose.

Zug

Inferno
109

1

115

118

Lo fondo é cupo si che non ci basta
loco a veder sanza montare al dosso
de l’arco, ove lo scoglio pit sovrasta.
Quivi venimmo; e quindi git nel fosso
vidi gente attuffata in uno sterco
che da li umani privadi parea mosso.
E mentre ch’io 1a git con l’occhio cerco,
vidi un col capo si di merda lordo
che non parea s’era laico o cherco.
Quei mi sgrido: “Perché se’ tu si gordo
di riguardar piu me che li altri brutti?”
E io a lui: “Perché, se ben ricordo,

121

gia tho veduto coi capelli asciutti,
e se’ Alessio Interminei da Lucca:
pero t’adocchio pit che li altri tutti.”

124

Ed elli allor, battendosi la zucca:

127

130

133

136

“Qua git m’hanno sommerso le lusinghe
ond’ io non ebbi mai la lingua stucca.”
Appresso cio lo duca: “Fa che pinghe,”
mi disse, “il viso un poco piu avante,
si che la faccia ben con l’occhio attinghe
di quella sozza e scapigliata fante
che la si graffia con l’unghie merdose,
e€ or s’accoscia e ora é in piedi stante:
Taide é, la puttana che rispuose
al drudo suo quando disse, “Ho io grazie
grandi apo te?’: ‘Anzi maravigliose!’
E quinci sian le nostre viste sazie.”

280

Canto 18

109

112

115

118

The bottom is so deep that no vantage point is
sufficient without climbing on the back of the arch,
where the ridge is highest.
There we came; and from there I saw, down in the

ditch, people immersed in dung that seemed to have
come from human privies.
And while I am searching with my eyes down
there, I saw one with his head so filthy with shit that
whether he was lay or clerk did not show.
He scolded me: “Why are you so hungry to look
more at me than the other filthy ones?” And I to him:
“Because, if I recall well,

121

124

127
130

133

136

I have seen you before with dry hair, and you are
Alessio Interminei of Lucca; therefore I eye you more
than all the others.”
And he again, beating his noggin: “I am
submerged down here by the flatteries with which
my tongue was never cloyed.”
After that, my leader told me: “See that you push
your eye a little further on, so that it attains the face
of that filthy baggage with disordered hair who
is scratching herself with her shitty nails, now
squatting, now standing on her feet:
that is Thais, the whore who, when he said, ‘Do I

find great favor with you?’ replied to her lover:
‘Marvelous favor indeed!’
And therewith let our eyes be sated.”

Sc

281

NOTES

1-18. There is in Hell a place . . . gathers them in: This abrupt abandoning of the point of view of the pilgrim for that of the omniscient author provides a kind of proem to the Malebolge as a whole (Cantos 18-30); we now
begin the second half of the Inferno. In Malebolge, Cantos 18-22, 24, 26, 28,

and 30 (i.e., nine cantos out of thirteen) have proems emphasizing the craftsmanship of the poet; they contribute strongly to the formal unity of these thirteen cantos. (Cantos 23, 25, 27, and 29—in all but the last case the second of

two or more cantos devoted to a single bolgia—continue the narrative without
interruption.) This new self-conscious emphasis, which begins at 16.128—29 in
connection with the introduction of Geryon, represents a marked change from
the cantos preceding Malebolge; it is one of the ways Dante makes the entire
poetic texture more elaborate and more intense, as well as keeping before the
reader the problematic relation of poetry (fiction, allegory) to fraud.

1. There is in Hell a place . . . Malebolge: Malebolge means literally “evil
pouches” or “sacks.” The Italian word bolgia was borrowed from Old French
bulge (from medieval Latin bulga, apparently Celtic in origin), a bulge or what
bulges, thus a sack or purse (also in Middle English: see Skelton’s “Bouge of
Court”). The implicit comment on the greed that is said to motivate most of
the fraudulent is clear enough (see 19.71—72, where the point is made explicit).
The metaphor of the sack, especially appropriate to the “belly” of Hell, was used
also in 6.49-50 and 7.18. See Additional Note 13.
For the expression Iuogo é [there is a place], compare Latin est locus, as in the
story of Phaéthon quoted in the note to 17.27.
2. the color of iron: Dark gray.
5. broad, deep pit: The pit is Cocytus, where traitors are punished.
6. suo loco: Latin for “in its own place,” that is, in Cantos 32-34.

7-9. The belt that remains . . . ten valleys: The ten valleys containing the
ten varieties of “simple” fraud (see 11.52—60) are obviously imagined as concentric circles around the central pit.
10-18. where to guard . . . and gathers them in: The castle simile, deliberately contorted in syntax, rests on a noteworthy reversal at line 16, for the

282

Notes to Canto 18

surrounding cliffis correlated with the central keep of a castle, and the central pit

with the world surrounding the castle. The point is partly that this depth of Hell
is a kind of perverted and inverted fortress, that of Satan, who is at war both
with God and with the damned. That the pit “truncates” and “gathers in” the
ridges emphasizes the ambiguous futility of the structure.
The imagined diagram of the valleys surrounding the central pit strongly suggests, also, the structure of the web ofa spider, the traditional fraudulent hunter;

Satan’s position below this metaphorical web corresponds to that of the larger
species of spider as discussed in Pliny and the bestiaries (the smaller species sit
directly on the web).
22-24. On my right hand ... was full: The sinners are on the pilgrim’s
right because he and Virgil have turned to the left and are walking along beside
the pit. Note the parallel with 6.4—5.

25. At the bottom were the sinners, naked: Gmelin points out the parallel
with the frequent medieval experience of looking down into pits where bears
and other wild animals were kept.
28-33. as the Romans... toward the mountain: This is the first mention in the poem that 1300 (the year of the pilgrim’s journey to the other world)
was proclaimed by Boniface VIII in February to be a Jubilee year (an innovation at the time), according to which special plenary indulgences were granted
for daily visiting of the basilicas of San Pietro in Vaticano and San Paolo fuori
le Mura (some three miles distant from each other). According to the chronicler Villani, 200,000 pilgrims visited Rome

during the Jubilee. Dante is the

only writer to mention this invention of barrier-enforced two-way
traffic, and his emphasis on ocular testimony is evidence of his having seen it
himself.
The bridge is the Ponte degli Angeli [Bridge of the Angels], originally built
in A.D. 132, still standing, though integrated with more modern structures

and adorned with statues designed by Bernini (seventeenth century); it crosses
the Tiber in front of “the castle,” the Castel Sant’Angelo (the emperor
Hadrian’s tomb, turned into a fortress by the popes), and in Dante’s time
provided the quickest route from the center of Rome to the Vatican. The
“mountain” is the Monte Giordano, a small hill opposite the Castel
Sant’ Angelo. This is the first of many references in Malebolge and Cocytus
to Italian cities, usually denouncing them (Bologna is denounced in this canto
in lines 58-63); there is a special irony in the parallel between Hell and the
Rome of the Jubilee.

35. horned demons with great whips: The first appearance in the poem of
the familiar medieval type ofdevil (see Figure 4), to which the closest approxi-

283

Inferno

mation so far has been the figure of Minos (Canto 5). Public whipping through
the streets was a frequent medieval punishment (see the note to line 72).
42. I am certainly not fasting for sight of him: In other words, I have
seen him before. The food metaphor (the first of many in the Malebolge; see

Additional Note 13) is picked up in line 51, as well as in the next bolgia.
43. to make out his features: Dante’s term figurarlo [literally, to figure him;
cf. French figure, face] connects this act of recognition with the “pattern” (figura)
of the Malebolge (line 12).
50. Venedico Caccianemico: A prominent Bolognese Guelf nobleman, who
in fact seems to have lived until 1302; he served as podesta of several cities (see
the note to 6.96). His first name is derived from Latin benedico [I bless]; his family name means “drive away the enemy.”
51. such pungent sauces: Use of the metaphor of highly seasoned sauce for
punishment seems to derive from popular usage (Sapegno); compare line 42,
with note. The early commentators also point out the existence of a common
grave for executed criminals outside Bologna, called the Salsa. The use of the
plural is odd, referring, it would seem, to the repeated whip blows.

52-54. Unwilling ... the former world: We begin to find souls unwilling to be recognized and mentioned in the world of the living, in marked
contrast to Ciacco (6.88—89), Pier delle Vigne (13.76—78), and others higher
in Hell.

53. your clear speech: This seems an odd characterization of the pilgrim’s
scornful metaphors; it is sometimes taken to refer to the familiarity he reveals
with Bolognese customs and ways of speech (Dante, who in all probability had
spent a year or more in Bologna, praises the harmoniousness of the Bolognese
dialect in De vulgari eloquentia 1.15.5—7; cf. lines 58-61).
55-57. It wasI... the shameful tale: The incident referred to here has left
no record in the chroniclers. The early commentators, though disagreeing as to
the identity of the marchese (Azzo VIII of Este or Obizzo of Este), agree that
Ghisolabella was Venedico’s sister.
57. tale: The Italian novella [news] becomes the name of an entire literary genre
in the wake of Boccaccio’s Decameron (which, incidentally, singles out Bolognese
flattery for satire, 7.7).

284

Notes to Canto 18

58-63. And not only I... our greedy breast: See the note to lines 28-33.

61. to say sipa now between the Savena and the Reno: Sipa is Bolognese
dialect for “yes.” The Savena and the Reno are rivers in and near Bologna.
66. here there are no females to coin: The pimps are identified as ones
who turn women into coins; see the note to 11.110—11, on the generative ter-

minology applied to usury. The first sin of fraud is metaphorically connected
with the last sin of violence, usury.

70-79. we climbed . . . we looked down: This canto exemplifies what will
be a frequent alternation between viewing the Malebolge from the bank parallel
to the ditch and from the bridge crossing over it. In only two cases (in Cantos
19 and 23) do the poets actually descend into the bolge.
72. those eternal circlings: The Italian is cerchie (not cerchi [circles]): the feminine implies a concrete instance; the use of the term cerchia for public whipping
is attested in medieval Tuscany.

73. gapes: Dante had already used the word vaneggia in line 5.
83-96. Jason: Dante knew the story of Jason from Ovid’s Met. 7.1—424, Heroides
6, and Statius’s Theb. 5.29—485.

85. how regal is his bearing still: The descriptive touches on Jason’s noble
appearance (line 83) and bearing may have been suggested by Met. 7.43—45, on
the appeal for Medea ofJason’s beauty and nobility. Jason was the son of Aeson,
exiled king of Iolcos.
87. robbed the Colchians of the ram: Having sailed to Colchis, at the east-

ern end of the Black Sea, in the ship Argo, Jason won the Golden Fleece (the
fleece of the ram that had carried Phryxus and Helle to Colchis; the ram was
made the constellation Aries) with the help of Medea, daughter of the king, whom
he carried off. Dante refers to this exploit repeatedly in the Paradiso (see Par.
2.16-18, 25.7, 33.9496, with notes).

88-94. He visited ... pregnant and alone: Made revolting to their husbands by Venus because of their failure to sacrifice to her, the women of Lemnos

resolve to kill all their men. Only Hypsipyle, young daughter of the king, secretly
spares her father’s life and enables him to flee. When the Argonauts, on the way
to Colchis, are forced by bad weather to stay for two years on Lemnos, the women

take them as husbands. According to both Ovid and Statius, Hypsipyle and Jason

285

Inferno

were ritually married. According to Heroides 6.61-62, Hypsipyle is pregnant when
Jason leaves; according to Statius, she gives birth before he does so. Hypsipyle is
referred to in Purg. 22.112 and 26.95.
91. elaborate words: Literally, “ornate.” Note the parallel emphasis on rhetorical ornamentation (and closely parallel phrasing) in Beatrice’s words to Virgil
in 2.67—69 (Mazzotta 1979).
96. also for Medea vengeance is taken: After begetting two children by
Medea, Jason abandoned her to marry Glauce, daughter of the king of Corinth;

on the wedding day Medea murdered the bride and both her own children in
Jason’s presence.
97. deceive: The third use of the verb ingannare (cf. lines 92 and 93).
103-36. From there ... be sated: While the punishment of whipping for
the pimps and seducers has no obvious metaphorical relevance to their sin (though
perhaps it alludes to their urgings of their victims), that of the flatterers is clearly
appropriate. It is the worthlessness of the flatteries themselves that is represented
by the excrement, in a substitution of lower for upper products of the body;
such inversions will be frequent in the Malebolge. Dante outdoes himself in the
expression of scorn and the vivid evocation of sensory disgust.

106. encrusted with a mold: See also the notes on lines 117 and 126. Emphasis on viscous or oily substances that coat the sinners’ bodies will be frequent
in the Malebolge. See Additional Note 13.
117. whether he was lay or clerk: That is, whether a portion of his head had
been shaved in the clerical tonsure; the clear implication is that both clerics and
laymen are present.
118. hungry: Another food metaphor.
122. Alessio Interminei: There seems to be a play on the idea of endlessness
in the shade’s surname; the name Alessio derives from a Greek verb meaning

“to protect.”
126. with which my tongue was never cloyed: The Italian adjective
stucco/a is itself a metaphor for stickiness derived from the noun stucco [plaster].

133-35. that is Thais ... Marvelous favor indeed: Thais is a character in
Terence’s play Eunuchus; Dante is quoting one scene, which in all probability
he read of in Cicero’s De amicitia, where her reported reply is cited as an example

286

Notes to Canto 18

of the exaggeration typical of flatterers, or in John of Salisbury’s Policraticus (twelfth
century), where flattery is identified as a species of fraud (Pézard 1948, Gmelin).
It is noteworthy that the only prostitute we find in Dante’s Hell is damned for
flattery, not prostitution, whereas the panders—those who induce women to
have sex for money and profit from it—are legion. For the women in Hell, see
the note to 30.37—41.
136. sated: As if by food.

287

CANTO

19

O Simon mago, o miseri seguaci,

che le cose di Dio, che di bontate

deon essere spose, € Voi rapaci

per oro e per argento avolterate,
or convien che per voi suoni la tromba,
pero che ne la terza bolgia state.
Gia eravamo, a la seguente tomba,

10

montati de lo scoglio in quella parte
ch’a punto sovra mezzo ’| fosso piomba.
O somma sapienza, quanta é l’arte
che mostri in cielo, in terra e nel mal mondo,

13

16

iL)

22

25

28

e quanto giusto tua virtu comparte!
Io vidi per le coste e per lo fondo
piena la pietra livida di fori,
d’un largo tutti e ciascun era tondo.
Non mi parean men ampi né maggiori
che que’ che son nel mio bel San Giovanni,
fatti per loco d’i battezzatori;
l'un de li quali, ancor non é molt’ anni,
rupp’ io per un che dentro v’annegava:
e questo sia suggel ch’ogn’ omo sganni.
Fuor de la bocca a ciascun soperchiava
d’un peccator li piedi e de le gambe
infino al grosso, e l’altro dentro stava.
Le piante erano a tutti accese intrambe,
per che si forte guizzavan le giunte
che spezzate averien ritorte e strambe.
Qual suole il fiammeggiar de le cose unte

muoversi pur su per la strema buccia:
tal era li dai calcagni a le punte.

288

CAN TOs 9
Third bolgia: simoniacs—Nicholas II—denunciation of corrupt clergy

O Simon Magus, O wretched followers, you who

the things of God, that should be brides of goodness,

rapaciously
adulterate for gold and for silver, now the trumpet
must sound for you, because you are in the third
pocket.
We had already climbed to that part of the ridge
that is exactly above the center of the next tomb.
O highest Wisdom, how great is the art you show
in the heavens, on earth, and in the evil world, and

how justly your Power distributes!
13

I saw, along the sides and the bottom, the livid

rock perforated with holes, all of the same size, and

22

25

28

each was round.
They seemed no less ample, nor greater, than
those in my lovely San Giovanni, made as places for
the baptizers;
one of which, not many years ago, I broke because
of one drowning inside it: and let this be a seal to
undeceive all men.
From the mouth of each protruded the feet and
legs of a sinner, as far as the thighs, and the rest was
inside.
All of them had both soles aflame; therefore they
wriggled their joints so violently that they would
have broken twisted withes or braided ropes.
As the flaming of oily things moves over just the
outer rind: so did it there from heel to toes.

289

Inferno
N

31

“Chi é colui, maestro, che si cruccia

guizzando piu che li altri suoi consorti,”
34

37

40

43

diss’ io, “e cui pit roggia fiamma succia?”
Ed elli a me: “Se tu vuo’ ch’i’ ti porti
la git: per quella ripa che piu giace,
da lui saprai di sé e de’ suoi torti.”
E io: “Tanto m’é bel, quanto a te piace:
tu se’ segnore, e sai ch’i’ non mi parto
dal tuo volere, e sai quel che si tace.”
Allor venimmo in su l’argine quarto;
volgemmo e discendemmo a mano stanca
la giu nel fondo foracchiato e arto.
Lo buon maestro ancor de la sua anca
non mi dipuose, si mi giunse al rotto

46

di quel che si piangeva con la zanca.
“O qual che se’ che ’] di su tien di sotto,
anima trista come pal commessa,”
comincia’ io a dir, “se puoi, fa motto.”

49

Io stava come ’] frate che confessa
lo perfido assessin, che, poi ch’é fitto,

52

55

58

61

richiama lui per che la morte cessa.
Ed el grido: “Se’ tu gia costi ritto,
se’ tu gia costi ritto, Bonifazio?
Di parecchi anni mi menti lo scritto.
Se’ tu si tosto di quell’ aver sazio
per lo qual non temesti torre a ’nganno
la bella donna, e poi di farne strazio?”
Tal mi fec’ io quai son color che stanno,
per non intender cio ch’é lor risposto,
quasi scornati, e risponder non sanno.
Allor Virgilio disse: “Dilli tosto:
‘Non son colui, non son colui che credi!’”

64

67

E io rispuosi come a me fu imposto.
Per che lo spirto tutti storse i piedi;
poi, sospirando e con voce di pianto,
mi disse: “Dunque che a me richiedi?

Se di saper ch’i’ sia ti cal cotanto
che tu abbi pero la ripa corsa,
sappi ch’i’ fui vestito del gran manto;
290

Canto 19

oil

“Who is that one, master, who shows the torture

by wriggling more than his other companions,” I
said, “and whom a ruddier flame sucks at?”
34

oy

40

And he to me: “If you wish me to carry you there,
down the bank that is less steep, from him you will
learn of him and his wrongs.”
And I: “So much is pleasant to me as pleases you:
you are my lord, you know that I do not depart from
your will, and you know what I leave unsaid.”
Then we came to the fourth bank; we turned and
descended to the left, down there into the narrow,

43

46

49

perforated ditch.
My good master did not put me down from his
hip until we reached the place of him who was
weeping so with his shanks.
“O whatever you are, you who hold your up side
down, sorrowing soul, planted like a pole,” I began
speaking, “if you can, say a word.”
I was standing like the friar that confesses the
treacherous assassin who, once he is fixed in the

52

earth, calls him back so as to put off his death.
And he cried out: “Are you already standing
there, are you already standing there, Boniface? The

55

58

writing lied to me by several years.
Are you so soon sated by the wealth for which
you did not fear to marry the lovely lady
fraudulently, and then to tear her apart?”
I became like those who, not understanding what
is said to them, stand as if mocked, at a loss for a

61

64

reply.
Then Virgil said: “Tell him quickly, ‘I am not he, I
am not he you suppose,” and I replied as was
commanded me.
Therefore the spirit twisted its feet; next, sighing,
its voice full of tears, it said to me: “Then what do

67

you want from me?
If itmatters so much to know who I am, that just

for this you have run down the bank, know that I
was clothed in the great mantle;
FEMI

Inferno

70

73

76

e veramente fui figliuol de l’orsa,

cupido si per avanzar li orsatti
che su l’avere e qui me misi in borsa.
Di sotto al capo mio son li altri tratti
che precedetter me simoneggiando
per le fessure de la pietra piatti.
La giu caschero io altresi quando
verra colui ch’i’ credea che tu fossi,

79

82

85

88

91

94

O77

100

allor ch’i’ feci ’] subito dimando.
Ma pit é ’] tempo gia che 1 pié mi cossi
e ch’i’ son stato cosi sottosopra,
ch’el non stara piantato coi pié rossi;
ché dopo lui verra di pit laida opra,
di ver’ ponente, un pastor sanza legge,
tal che convien che lui e me ricuopra.
Nuovo Iason sara, di cui si legge
ne’ Maccabei; e come a quel fu molle
suo re, cosi fia lui chi Francia regge.”
Io non so s’i’ mi fui qui troppo folle,
ch’i’ pur rispuosi lui a questo metro:
“Deh, or mi di: quanto tesoro volle
nostro Segnore in prima da san Pietro
ch’ei ponesse le chiavi in sua balia?
Certo non chiese se non: ‘Viemmi retro.’
Né Pier né li altri tolsero a Matia
oro od argento, quando fu sortito
al loco che perdé I’anima ria.
Pero ti sta, ché tu se’ ben punito;

e guarda ben la mal tolta moneta
ch’esser ti fece contra Carlo ardito.
E se non fosse ch’ancor lo mi vieta
la reverenza de le somme chiavi
che tu tenesti ne la vita lieta,

103

io userei parole ancor piu gravi;
ché la vostra avarizia il mondo attrista,

106

calcando i buoni e sollevando i pravi.
Di voi pastor s’accorse il Vangelista
quando colei che siede sopra |’acque
puttaneggiar coi regi a lui fu vista,
292

Canto 19

70

73

76

Wy

82

85

and truly I was a son of the she-bear, so greedy to
advance her cubs, that I pocketed wealth up there,
and myself down here.
Beneath my head are driven the others who
preceded me in simony, squeezed into the cracks of
the rock.
I, too, will fall down there, when he comes who I

believed you to be, when IJ asked my sudden
question.
But it has been a longer time that my feet have
burned and that I have been upsidedown like this,
than he will be planted with red feet:
for after him will come, from towards the west, a

lawless shepherd of even uglier deeds, such that he
will cover both him and me.
He will be a new Jason, like the one we read of in
Maccabees; and as his king was indulgent to the first
one, so the ruler of France will be to him.”

88

91

94

97

100

103

106

I do not know if here I became too rash, but I

replied to him in this meter: “Ah, now tell me: how
much treasure did
our Lord demand from Saint Peter, before he gave
the keys into his keeping? Surely he asked only,
‘Follow me.’
Neither Peter nor the others took from Matthias
gold or silver, when he was chosen for the place lost
by the wicked soul.
Therefore stay here, for you deserve your
punishment; and be sure to keep your ill-gotten coin,
which made you bold against Charles.
And were it not that I am forbidden by my
reverence for the highest keys, which you held in
happy life,
I would use still heavier words; for your avarice
afflicts the world, trampling the good and raising up
the wicked.
Of you shepherds the Evangelist took note, when
he saw her who sits upon the waters whoring with
the kings;
293

Inferno

109

quella che con le sette teste nacque,
e da le diece corna ebbe argomento
fin che virtute al suo marito piacque.

112

Fatto v’avete dio d’oro e d’argento;
e che altro é da voi a l’idolatre,
se non ch’elli uno, e voi ne orate cento?

115

Ahi, Costantin, di quanto mal fu matre,

non la tua conversion, ma quella dote
che da te prese il primo ricco patre!”’
118

E mentr’ io li cantava cotai note,

0 ira 0 coscienza che ’] mordesse,
iat

124

forte spingava con ambo le piote.
I’ credo ben ch’al mio duca piacesse,
con si contenta labbia sempre attese
lo suon de le parole vere espresse.
Pero con ambo le braccia mi prese;
e poi che tutto su mi s’ebbe al petto,

rimonto per la via onde discese.
127,

130

156

Né

si stanco d’avermi a sé distretto,

si men porto sovra ’] colmo de I’arco
che dal quarto al quinto argine é tragetto.
Quivi soavemente spuose il carco,
soave per lo scoglio sconcio ed erto
che sarebbe a le capre duro varco.
Indi un altro vallon mi fu scoperto.

294

Canto 19

109

TV

115

118

121

124

127,

130

133

she who was born with seven heads, and took

strength from her ten horns as long as virtue pleased
her husband.
You have made gold and silver your god; and
what difference is there between you and the idolworshipper, except that he prays to one, and you to a
hundred?
Ah, Constantine, not your conversion, but that

dowry which the first rich father took from you, has
been the mother of so much evil!”
And while I was singing these notes to him,
whether it was anger or conscience that was biting
him, he kicked violently with both his feet.
I firmly believe that it pleased iny leader, with
such a contented smile he listened still to the sound
of the true words I spoke.
Therefore with both arms he seized me; and when

he had lifted me up to his breast, he climbed back up
by the way he had come down.
Nor did he tire of holding me embraced, but
carried me to the top of the arch that gives passage
from the fourth to the fifth bank.
There he gently put his burden down, gently on
the rough, steep ridge, which even for she-goats
would be a difficult crossing.
From there another valley was revealed to me.

a:

295

NOTES
1. O Simon Magus: With an apostrophe (the only such canto beginning in
the Inferno; see the note to 18.1-18) Dante addresses Simon Magus, the magician from Samaria who offered the apostle Peter money for the power of the
laying on of hands, conveying the Holy Spirit (Acts 8.9-24). Simon Magus
gave his name to simony, the buying and selling of the sacramental powers of
the priesthood, or of the priestly office itself; for Dante and his time, simony
extended to nepotism in distributing church offices. The apocryphal Acts of
Peter (Elliott) finds Simon in Rome as the chief magician of the emperor Nero;

Simon is bested by Saint Peter in a series of magic competitions (based on
Moses and Aaron’s duel with Pharaoh’s magicians); finally he flies, held up
by a demon, until Saint Peter prays; then the demon must let him fall, which

he does, breaking his leg in three places (there is an effective twelfth-century
capital showing Simon flying and then falling head first, in the Cathedral of
Autun).

2-4. the things of God . . . and for silver: Principally, but not exclusively,
preaching and the sacraments, whose power is conferred with priestly office. The
metaphors of marriage (“brides’’) and prostitution (“adulterate for gold”) are not

casual: the sacrament of marriage, Saint Paul says (Eph. 5.23—32), points to the
mystical marriage of Christ and the Church; at his consecration a bishop puts on
a ring that symbolizes his marriage to his diocese, the “bride of Christ.” For
fornication and prostitution as Old Testament images of priestly corruption, see
the note to 1.100.
5. the trumpet must sound for you: The trumpet of epic poetry, of public
denunciation, as in Hosea 8.1 (and cf. Additional Note 9), with reference also to

the trumpet of the Last Judgment.
16-18. They seemed .. . baptizers: Dante’s likening of the perforations in the rocky floor of this
bolgia to the baptismal fonts of
the Florentine Baptistery of San
Giovanni

is a famous crux, since

they no longer exist (Figure 3).
Early commentators differ on
whether the reference is to the
Figure 3. The baptismal font in the Pisa Baptistery.
fonts themselves or to smaller
openings, adjacent to the fonts, designed so that priests might be kept from the

296

Notes to Canto 19

crowds (mass baptisms were held during the Easter season). We follow this latter
view, which accords with the pilgrim’s repeated assumption of the role of priest
in this canto (see the notes to lines 19-21, 46-51, and 90-117).

19-21. one of which . . . to undeceive all men: No contemporary tradition records Dante having broken any font or portion of one. In an influential
note, Spitzer (1943) proposed that not a historical event, but Dante’s denunciation in this canto of the corrupt Church, done with the intention of “undeceiv-

ing,” or enlightening, his readers, is meant. The breaking of the font (line 20) is
echoed in the violence done to the Church by Boniface (line 57; Musa). This
incident, too, is an instance of lay intervention in a situation where the clergy

have proved inadequate. See Additional Note 7.
21. let this be a seal: The antecedent of “this” is by no means clear (see the
note to lines 19-21). In the Middle Ages, written testimony was often authenticated with a personal seal, oral testimony by an oath. Instances of personal witness
by the pilgrim-poet gain prominence in the realm of fraud (e.g., 16.127—29,
18.28—33, 21.7-15, and 21.94—96); for perjury as a culminating type of fraud,
see 30.112—29, with notes. See Additional Note 7.

22-24. From the mouth . . . the rest was inside: Since the holes have been
explicitly compared with baptismal fonts, the immediate reference is to an
inversion of the iconography of baptism, which typically showed the baptized
in a font (or a river), appearing from the waist up (see 10.33, with note). Inversion is in fact a major governing principle in the canto, for simony represents a
drastic inversion of values. The sinners’ headlong fall has repeated Simon’s as
well as Satan’s (see the note to line 1); once we know the sinners are popes and
other clergy, it is clear that their punishment parodies the crucifixion of Saint
Peter, who, according to the apocryphal Acts of Peter, out of humility asked to
be crucified head down.
25-30.

All of them

had ... from heel to toes: Fire on the feet (and

“anointed” feet, at that: see the next note) involves several complex references.

The most important is to the descent of the Holy Spirit into the gathered
apostles at Pentecost (Acts 2), in which “there appeared to them parted tongues
as it were of fire, and it sat upon every one of them” (always represented pictorially as sitting on the apostles’ heads). This was traditionally accounted to
be the actualizing of the Church, for from the continuing presence ofthe Spirit
derived all the authority and power ofthe clergy. According to the traditional
Catholic doctrine of the Church, the traditional ceremony of the ordination
of priests, in which the bishop placed his hands on the postulant’s head and
prayed for the descent of the Spirit, was a reenactment of Pentecost and assured that each ordination was ultimately continuous with it, in an unbroken

297

Inferno

chain of contact going back to the apostles, the so-called apostolic succession
(cf. French 1964).
28. oily things: In context, a clear reference to the chrism (anointing) important in four of the seven sacraments (ordination, baptism, confirmation, and
extreme unction [last anointing]).

40-42. Then we came to the fourth bank . . . perforated ditch: That is,
they finish crossing the bridge to the far (“the fourth”) bank; then Virgil lifts the
pilgrim to his hip, according to his promise in lines 34—35, and carries him to
the bottom of the bolgia. On only one other occasion do the two descend into a
bolgia: in Canto 23, also involving denunciation of the clergy.
45. weeping so with his shanks: The pilgrim has singled out this soul in line
32, which also prepares for the unusual expression in which the violent motions
of the legs are interpreted as a sign of grief, thus as weeping.
46-51. O whatever .. . put off his death: By Florentine law, professional
assassins were placed head down in a pit and buried alive. As the commentators
note, according to the simile the pilgrim has adopted toward the condemned
pope the role of a priest confessing a layman: the iconoclastic nature of the layman Dante’s enterprise could hardly be more pithily symbolized. The imagined
priest is a friar, almost certainly a Franciscan, both because the professed humility of the “lesser brothers” led them into such forms of service and also for a
futher juxtaposition of humility with the corruption of the prelates; there is a
sharp irony here, for while he was a cardinal, Nicholas had been the special protector of the Franciscans (the corruption of the Franciscans and Dominicans themselves is targeted in Paradiso 11-12).
46. you who hold your up side down: The Italian is even pithier, since il di
su [literally, the upper] refers both to Nicholas’s position and to his values.
52-57. Are you already ... to tear her apart: With an audacious stroke,
Dante has Boniface’s sins summarized and his damnation predicted by another
pope in 1300, while Boniface was still alive.

Boniface VIII was born Benedetto Caetani, of a noble family, at Anagni, near
Rome, in 1235. Extremely able, he rose in the Church and was made a cardinal

in 1281. After the resignation of Celestine V in 1293 (see 3.59-60, with note),

he was elected pope at Naples in December, 1294 and crowned on January 23,
1295. He died on October 11, 1303, in Rome.
Boniface was extremely ambitious for the Church, and his papacy was filled

298

Notes to Canto 19

with conflict (for his fight with the Colonnas, a powerful Roman family, see
27.85-111, with notes). Particularly bitter was his struggle with Philip IV of
France over the right to tax the French clergy. With the famous bulls Clericis
laicos (1296) and Unam sanctam (1302), Boniface affirmed the supremacy of

the papacy over secular rulers and excommunicated Philip; Philip had Boniface’s election declared invalid and sent armed men to arrest him at Anagni
in September 1303. Although he was rescued by the populace, the violence
and humiliation of the experience hastened Boniface’s death (see Purg. 20.85—
90).
Dante’s antagonism to Boniface would have been aroused by the pope’s claims
to supremacy over the emperor (refuted in Monarchia 3), but Dante thought
Boniface utterly corrupt, guilty of having bribed his way to the papacy (see the
note to lines 55-57) and of cynically engineering the Black Guelf coup in Florence in 1301 that led to Dante’s exile (see 6.64—72, with note).

54. The writing lied to me: Nicholas believed Boniface was to die in 1303
(as he did). The “writing” is the book of the future, which the damned may
read until the events approach (cf. 10.97-108, with note).

55-57. Are you so soon sated . . . tear her apart: A reference to the widespread accusation that Boniface VIII persuaded Celestine V to abdicate (see
3.59-60, with note) and used copious bribes to ensure his own election. The
“tearing apart” of Lady Church refers to Boniface’s aggressive use of simony:
he treated the treasure of the Church as his own to dispose of (see Villani,
Chronicle 8.64).

57. the lovely lady: The Church, the bride of Christ and therefore of the pope,
Christ’s vicar on earth (cf. lines 2—4).
62. Iam not he, I am not he: The repetition answers to Nicholas’s in lines
52-53. Michaela Janan, as an undergraduate, observed that in John 18.17 and
25 Peter twice says “I am not” (non sum, cf. non son), when denying Christ.
69.

clothed in the great mantle: That is, he was a pope. In Purg. 19.103-5,

Dante has another pope mention the large, sleeveless papal mantle in a passage
that connects the pope’s mantle with the robes worn by the hypocrites in Canto
23)
70-72.

and truly I . . . myself down here: The lines identify the speaker as

Nicholas III Orsini, who was pope from 1277 to 1280 (the she-bear was the em-

blem of the Roman Orsini family). Born shortly before 1220, he was a kinsman of

299

Inferno

the future Boniface VIII. Contemporaries thought of Nicholas as one of the first
popes to practice simony and nepotism on a grand scale (Scott 1970).
73-75. Beneath my head .. . cracks of the rock: In another ironic inversion, the position of the simoniac popes, with the head of each pushing on his
predecessor’s feet, is a sharply focused parodic inversion of the apostolic succession (see the note to lines 25-30).
79-84. it has been a longer time ... both him and me: Nicholas has
been “planted” for twenty years (since 1280); Boniface’s tenure will be shorter.
Thus fewer than twenty-three years will pass from this moment (early April 1300)
before Clement V, the next pope to be “planted,” arrives. Clement actually died
in 1314.

82-84. after him will come ... both him and me: The “lawless shepherd” is Bertrand de Got, who as Clement V transferred the papal see from Rome
to Avignon and appeased the ambition of Philip IV. Born in Gascony, Clement
was bishop of Commynes by 1295 and archbishop of Bordeaux in 1299. After
being elected in 1305, thanks to interference from Philip the Fair, he immediately created nine French cardinals. Crowned in Lyons, he never went to Rome,

and from 1308 on kept the papal see in Avignon, beginning the “Babylonian
captivity” of the papacy, which lasted until 1377. He canonized Pietro di Morrone
(Celestine V) and conducted a posthumous trial of Boniface (1312). He also
delayed trying Guillaume de Nogaret and Sciarra Colonna, who had attacked
Boniface VIII, finally absolving them from the penalties, though not the responsibility, connected with the pope’s death. Never named by Dante, Clement is
identified by unflattering nicknames or periphrases. For his role in Philip’s
destruction of the Templars, see Purg. 20.91—93; for the removal of the papal
see to Avignon, Purg. 32.157—60; for his simony, Par. 17.82; and for his betrayal

of Henry VII, Par. 30.142—48.
85-86. a new Jason .. . in Maccabees: Not the Argonaut, but the brother
of the high priest Onias in 2 Maccabees 4.7—8; he buys from the emperor
Antiochus IV Epiphanes the high priesthood, with the promise of 440 pieces of
silver. Villani (Chronicle 8.80) reports that Bertrand de Got, future Clement V,
offered to Philip IV, in return for his support in the papal election, a tenth of all
the revenues from France for five years.

88. I do not know ... in this meter: Here Dante uses the Italian folle, a
term used elsewhere in the Comedy only in reference to the possible rashness of
the voyage ofthe pilgrim and the journey ofUlysses (see 2.35, 26.125, and Par.

300

Notes to Canto 19

27.82-83). “This meter” refers not only to the pilgrim’s words (cf. the
“shameful meter” of 7.32), but also to the appropriateness of the denunciation,
its “measure.”
90-117. Ah, now tell me. . . so much evil: With 16.73—76 (see notes), this
passage is an important moment in the pilgrim’s/Dante’s gradual assumption of
the role of prophet. Here, like the prophet Nathan (whose Hebrew name Dante
saw as related to his own, both meaning “giving”; see Sarolli 1971), the pilgrim
is confronting the mighty. It is the longest denunciation of the corrupt clergy in
the poem.

90-96. how much treasure ... the wicked soul: Dante has the pilgrim
refer to two moments traditionally thought of as important in establishing the
Church, in addition to Pentecost: the granting of the keys to Peter (Matt. 16.1819) and the election of Matthias to take the place of Judas (Acts 1.26).
90. how much treasure did our Lord demand: Implicit is Dante’s belief
that the Church should possess no material wealth or temporal power (see
Monarchia 3.14.3 and Epistle 8.2—-3, “To the Italian cardinals”).

93. Follow me: Matt. 4.19, Jesus’ initial calling of Peter and his brother Andrew.
95. gold or silver: Dante denounces the wealth of the Church as the source of
its corruption. The passages referred to are Acts 3.6, “Silver and gold I have none,”
spoken by Peter, and Matt. 10.9: “Do not possess gold, nor silver, nor money in
your purses”; Dante cites them in his arguments against the wealth of the Church
in Monarchia 3.9.14 (see also Convivio 4.11).

98-99. ill-gotten coin . .. against Charles: Dante may be referring to the
(now discredited) story (Villani, Chronicle 7.54, 57) that Nicholas accepted a bribe
to join in the plot that led to the “Sicilian Vespers” (see Par. 8.67 and note), the
uprising that drove the Angevins from Sicily.
101. my reverence for the highest keys: Dante’s piety toward the papacy
as an institution is documented: see Purg. 20.85—90, Epistle 8, and Monarchia 3.3

and 3.14.5 (Foster 1980). But only one pope, besides Saint Peter, is found in
Dante’s Paradise (John XXI, Peter of Spain, the logician; that he was pope is not
mentioned), and only two in Purgatory (Adrian V and Martin IV), while four
popes are said to be damned (Anastasius II?, Nicholas III, Boniface VIII, and
Clement V), and another probably so (Celestine V).

301

Inferno

105. trampling the good and raising up the wicked: Again, the punishment inverts the crime (see the note to lines 73-75), which had itself inverted

the proper order of things.
106-11. Of you shepherds . . . pleased her husband: Dante is drawing on
the Apocalypse; see Apoc. 17.1-—3, 5:
And there came one of the seven angels . . . saying, Come, I will shew
thee the condemnation of the great harlot who sitteth upon many
waters, With whom the kings of the earth have committed fornication. . . .

And I saw a woman sitting upon a scarlet colored beast . . . having seven
heads and ten horns.
The seven heads and ten horns are usually taken to be the seven sacraments
and the Ten Commandments, chief institutions of the New and Old Laws. In
the New Testament, the “harlot” was associated with Babylon and pagan Rome;
for Dante, as for the “Spiritual” Franciscans, she is the corrupt clergy, led by the
popes, her “whoring” the Church’s involvement in temporal affairs and Clement V’s subservience to Philip IV. For these identifications, see Purg. 32.148—60,

with notes.
112-14. You have made gold ... you to a hundred: Dante has the pilgrim identify the corrupt clergy’s avarice as a form of idolatry, the sin perhaps
most frequently denounced by the Old Testament prophets, with whom he is
closely identifying himself (line 112 is a close translation of the Vulgate text of
Hosea 8.4). The identification is not original with Dante: shortly before his time,
avarice and nummulatria, or the worship of the graven images on coins, became
important targets of sermons (Camille 1989).
115-17.

Ah, Constantine . . . so much evil: The Donation of Constantine

was a document forged in the papal curia around 750; for centuries, it was
held to be authentic even by the opponents of the popes and was proved false
(on linguistic grounds) only in the fifteenth century by Lorenzo Valla and
Nicholas of Cusa. According to the Donation, the emperor Constantine the
Great (A.D. 288-337; emperor from 306), having been miraculously cured of
leprosy by baptism at the hands of Pope Sylvester (a total fabrication) granted
to the pope (“the first rich father’’) and his successors supreme temporal power
in the West. Dante mentions the Donation on two other occasions in the
Comedy (27.94—95 and Par. 20.55); in the Monarchia (3.10.1), he argues that
Constantine’s alienation of imperial power was legally invalid, its acceptance
by the papacy a departure from Christ’s injunction against possessions (see the
note to line 95).

302

Notes to Canto 19

132. even for she-goats: Herzman and Stephany (1978) detect an ironic allusion to “sheep and goats” (Matt. 25.32) as representing the saved and the
damned, respectively, at the Last Judgment. Surely “goats,” the damned popes
would still have a hard time of it. The popes were shepherds (see lines 83 and
106); Christ’s charge to Peter to “feed my sheep” (John 21.15-17), like the gift
of the keys to Peter (Matt. 16.18—19), was one of the principal texts adduced to
support papal authority.

303

CANTO

10

20

Di nova pena mi conven far versi
e dar matera al ventesimo canto
de la prima canzon, ch’é d’i sommersi.
Io era gia disposto tutto quanto
a riguardar ne lo scoperto fondo,
che si bagnava d’angoscioso pianto;
e vidi gente per lo vallon tondo
venir, tacendo e lagrimando, al passo
che fanno le letane in questo mondo.
Come ’] viso mi scese in lor pit: basso
mirabilmente apparve esser travolto
ciascun tra ’] mento e ’] principio del casso,

13

ché da le reni era tornato ’! volto,

16

perché ’] veder dinanzi era lor tolto.
Forse per forza gia di parlasia

e in dietro venir li convenia,

si travolse cosi alcun del tutto,
ma io nol vidi, né credo che sia.
19

22

25

Se Dio ti lasci, lettor, prender frutto

di tua lezione, or pensa per te stesso
com’ io potea tener lo viso asciutto,
quando la nostra imagine di presso
vidi si torta che ’] pianto de li occhi
le natiche bagnava per lo fesso.
Certo io piangea, poggiato a un de’ rocchi
del duro scoglio, si che la mia scorta

28

mi disse: “Ancor se’ tu de li altri sciocchi?
Qui vive la pieta quand’ é ben morta:
chi é piu scellerato che colui
che al giudicio divin passion comporta?
304

CANTO

2)

Fourth bolgia: diviners—Amphiaraus—
Tiresias—A rruns—Manto—
founding of Mantua—others

10

13

16

Of a strange new punishment I must make verses
and take matter for the twentieth song in this first
canticle, which is of those submerged.
I was already bent over to gaze into the
uncovered depth, which was bathed with anguished
weeping;
and I saw people coming along the curving valley,
silent and shedding tears, at the pace taken by litanies
in this world.
As my gaze went lower on them, I saw that each
was marvelously twisted between the chin and the
beginning of the chest,
for the face was turned toward the kidneys, and
they were forced to walk backwards, since seeing
forward was taken from them.
Perhaps the force of paralysis at some time has
contorted someone so completely, but I have never

seen it, nor do I believe it can be.
19

22

25

28

So may God permit you, reader, to take profit
from your reading, now think for yourself how I
could keep dry eyes,
when from close by I saw our image so twisted
that the tears of their eyes were bathing their buttocks
down the cleft.
Surely I wept, leaning on one of the rocks of the
hard ridge, so that my guide said to me: “Are you

still one of the other fools?
Here pity lives when it is quite dead: who is more
wicked than one who brings passion to God’s
judgment?

305

Inferno

31

34

Drizza la testa, drizza, e vedi a cui

s’aperse a li occhi d’i Teban la terra,
per ch’ei gridavan tutti: “Dove rui,
Anfiarao? perché lasci la guerra?’
E non resto di ruinare a valle
fino a Minos, che ciascheduno. afferra.

37

Mira c’ha fatto petto de le spalle;
perché volse veder troppo davante,
di retro guarda e fa retroso calle.

40

Vedi Tiresia, che mutod sembiante

43

46

quando di maschio femmina divenne,
cangiandosi le membra tutte quante;
e prima, poi, ribatter li convenne
li duo serpenti avvolti, con la verga,
che riavesse le maschili penne.
Aronta é quel ch’al ventre li s’atterga,
che ne’ monti di Luni, dove ronca

49

52

lo Carrarese che di sotto alberga,
ebbe tra’ bianchi marmi la spelonca
per sua dimora, onde a guardar le stelle
e ’] mar non li era la veduta tronca.
E quella che ricuopre le mammelle,
che tu non vedi, con le trecce sciolte,

55

58

e ha di 1a ogne pilosa pelle,
Manto fu, che cerco per terre molte;
poscia si puose la dove nacqu’ io;
onde un poco mi piace che m/’ascolte.
Poscia che ’] padre suo di vita uscio
e venne serva la citta di Baco,

61

questa gran tempo per lo mondo gio.
Suso in Italia bella giace un laco,
a pie de l’Alpe che serra Lamagna
sovra Tiralli, c’-ha nome Benaco.

64

67

Per mille fonti, credo, e piu si bagna
tra Garda e Val Camonica e Pennino
de l’acqua che nel detto laco stagna.
Loco é nel mezzo 1a dove ’] trentino
pastore e quel di Brescia e ’] veronese
segnar poria, s’ e’ fesse quel cammino.

306

Canto 20

31

34

Raise your head, raise it and see the one for
whom the earth opened before the eyes of the
Thebans, so that they all cried: ‘Where are you
rushing,
Amphiaraus? Why are you leaving the war?’ And
he did not stop falling downward until he reached
Minos, who seizes each one.

37

Look how he has made his breast his back;
because he wished to see too far ahead, now he looks

40

43

46

backward and treads a backward path.
See Tiresias, who changed shape when he turned
from male to female, changing all his members, every
one;
and then he had to strike the two entangled
serpents with his staff once more, before he could
regain his male plumage.
Arruns is the one who backs up against his belly
there; in the mountains of Luni, where the Carrarese
hoes, who lives below,

49

52

he had a cave in the white marble for his
dwelling, whence the view of the stars and the sea
was not cut off.
And she who covers up her breasts, which you
cannot see, with her loosened tresses, and has every

55

58

61

64

hairy skin on the other side,
was Manto, who searched through many lands;
finally she settled where I was born; therefore I wish
you to listen for a little.
After her father departed from life, and the city of
Bacchus was enslaved, for a long time she wandered
through the world.
Up in beautiful Italy there lies a lake, at the foot
of the Alps that close in Germany above the Tyrol,
whose name is Benaco.
A thousand springs, I think, and more, bathe the
land between Garda and Val Camonica and the Alps,

67

with the water that collects in that lake.
In the center there is a place where the shepherds
of Trento and Brescia, and the Veronese, could all

give blessing, if they made the journey.
307

Inferno

70

Us

76

Siede Peschiera, bello e forte arnese

da fronteggiar Bresciani e Bergamaschi,
ove la riva ’ntorno pit: discese.
Ivi convien che tutto quanto caschi
cid che ’n grembo a Benaco star non puo,
e fassi flume git per verdi paschi.
Tosto che l’acqua a correr mette co,
non piu Benaco ma Mencio si chiama
fino a Governol, dove cade in Po.

79

82

85

Non molto ha corso ch’el trova una lama,

ne la qual si distende e la ’mpaluda;
e suol di state talor esser grama.
Quindi passando la vergine cruda
vide terra nel mezzo del pantano
sanza coltura e d’abitanti nuda.
Li, per fuggire ogne consorzio umano,
ristette con suoi servi a far sue arti,

88

OI

94

OF

100

103

106

e visse, e vi lascid suo corpo vano.
Li uomini poi che ’ntorno erano sparti
s’accolsero a quel loco, ch’era forte
per lo pantan ch’avea da tutte parti.
Fer la citta sovra quell’ossa morte;
e per colei che ’! loco prima elesse,
Mantiia l’appellar sanz’ altra sorte.
Gia fuor le genti sue dentro piu spesse,
prima che la mattia da Casalodi
da Pinamonte inganno ricevesse.
Pero t’assenno che, se tu mai odi

originar la mia terra altrimenti,
la verita nulla menzogna frodi.”
E io: “Maestro, 1 tuoi ragionamenti
mi son si certi e prendon si mia fede,
che li altri mi sarien carboni spenti.
Ma dimmi de la gente che procede,
se tu ne vedi alcun degno di nota;
ché solo a cio la mia mente rifiede.”
Allor mi disse: “Quel che da la gota
porge la barba in su le spalle brune,
fu—quando Grecia fu di maschi vota
308

Canto 20

70

Us)
76

Peschiera sits there, a handsome, strong fortress,

to hold the front against the Brescians and the
Bergamasques, where the shore around it is lowest.
There must fall whatever cannot stay in Benaco,
becoming a river through green fields.
As soon as the water begins to flow, it is no
longer called Benaco but Mincio, as far as Governolo,

79

82
85

88

on

94

where it falls into the Po.
It has not flowed far before finding a depression
in which it spreads out and becomes a swamp; and
in the summer it is often noxious.
Passing there the harsh virgin saw land in the
midst of the fens, uncultivated and bare of people.
There, to flee all human fellowship, with her

servants she stayed to ply her arts, there lived, and
there left her empty body.
The people who were scattered about later
gathered to that spot, which the swamp in all
directions made strong.
They built their city over those dead bones; and,
after her who first chose the place, they named it
Mantua without any other augury.
The people housed there used to be more
numerous, before the fool of Casalodi was deceived

SU

by Pinamonte.
Therefore I advise you, if you ever hear any other
origin given for my city, that you let no lie defraud

the truth.”
100

103

106

And I: “Master, your discourse is so sure and so
gains my belief, that any others would be spent coals
to me.
But among the people in this procession, tell me if
you see any worthy of note; for my mind still comes
back to that alone.”
Then he told me: “That one, who from his cheek

spreads his beard down over his dark shoulders, was
—when Greece was emptied of males,

309

Inferno

109

112

115

si ch’a pena rimaser per le cune—
augure, e diede ’] punto con Calcanta
in Aulide a tagliar la prima fune.
Euripilo ebbe nome, e cosi ’] canta
l’alta mia tragedia in alcun loco:
ben lo sai tu che la sai tutta quanta.
Quell’altro che ne’ fianchi é cosi poco,

Michele Scotto fu, che veramente

de le magiche frode seppe ’] gioco.
118

121

124

127

130

Vedi Guido Bonatti; vedi Asdente,

ch’avere inteso al cuoio e a lo spago
ora vorrebbe, ma tardi si pente.
Vedi le triste che lasciaron l’ago,
la spuola e ’] fuso, e fecersi ’ndivine;
fecer malie con erbe e con imago.
Ma vienne omai, ché gia tiene 7] confine
d’amendue li emisperi e tocca l’onda
sotto Sobilia Caino e le spine;
e gia iernotte fu la luna tonda:
ben ten de’ ricordar, ché non ti nocque
alcuna volta per la selva fonda.”
Si mi parlava, e andavamo introcque.

310

Canto 20

109

112

1S

118

so that hardly any remained in the cradles—an
augur, and along with Calchas he determined the
point to cut the first ship’s cable in Aulis.
Eurypylus was his name, and thus my high
tragedy sings of him at one place: you know that
well, for you know it through and through.
That other who is so slender in the flanks was
Michael Scot, who truly knew the game of magic
frauds.
See Guido Bonatti; see Asdente, who now wishes
he had attended to his leather and his thread, but

repents too late.
il

See the wretched women who left their needles, their
spindles, and their distaffs, and became soothsayers;

124

they cast spells with herbs and images.
But come along now, for Cain with his thorns now
holds the boundary of the two hemispheres and
touches the wave below Seville;

127

and already last night the moon was full: you
must remember it well, for several times it did not

130

harm you in the deep forest.”
So he spoke to me, and we walked meanwhile.

Me

311

IN OES

1-3. Of a strange ... those submerged: Note the parallel with the opening of Canto 19; there is a close relation between simony (which pretends that
the gifts of the Holy Spirit, of which one is prophecy, can be sold) and soothsaying. The frequency of self-conscious canto openings in the Malebolge is pointed
out in the note to 18.1-18. Here Dante for the first time in the poem writes of
its subdivision into canticles (cantiche) and cantos (canti).
1. strange new: The Italian nova has both meanings (see the notes to 6.4 and

1373).

3. canticle: That is, the Inferno, translating cantica though Dante’s term here

is canzon (Latin cantio), possibly treated as an augmentative of canto (line 2);

the cognate term chanson is used of long poems in Old French, as in chanson de
geste (for the use of these terms in the early manuscripts and commentaries, see
Pertile 1991). For the issue of the literary genre of the Comedy, see the note to
16.127-29.
3. which is of those submerged: That is, the first canticle is about the damned;
Hell is often referred to as the abyss or, figurally, the Red Sea; this figural rela-

tion is made most fully explicit at the beginning of the Purgatorio.
9. at the pace taken by litanies: Litanies were typically religious processions
begging God and the saints for help; their pace was very slow. The ironic point
of the reference would seem related to the fact that the soothsayers characteristically take the future as already determined. See Additional Note 8.

11-12. marvelously twisted ... the beginning of the chest: The violence of the distortion is partly conveyed by the order of the description, as if
the head had been held still and the rest of the body twisted.
14-15. they were forced . . . taken from them: The contrapasso (discussed
in the note to lines 37—39) is already implicit, as well as the idea that in life the
soothsayers’ superstition and fraudulence obstructed their capacity for accurate
natural foresight.
19-25. So may God permit. . . Surely I wept: Lines 19-22 are the fourth
apostrophe of the reader in Inferno (see the note to 8.9496). The pilgrim’s weeping here has been the subject of discussion, some commentators taking it as reflecting a specific sympathy for the diviners. We take it as expressing the pilgrim’s
grief at the distortion of the human body (made in the image of God), sufficient

Uy

Notes to Canto 20

grounds for his weeping and for the reader’s meditation. The mention of the
pilgrim’s weeping also allows time for the considerable force of our empathic
discomfort to set in. See Additional Note 8.

26-30. so that my guide said . . . to God’s judgment: Virgil’s rebuke,
too, has been variously interpreted, depending on the significance assigned to
line 30. Most commentators take it as we do, as rebuking the pilgrim’s grief at
the punishment; other possibilities are discussed in Additional Note 8.
28. Here pity lives when it is quite dead: The commentators point to the
considerable theological literature available to Dante on the nature of true compassion, appropriate only toward the living or toward the souls in Purgatory,
who can change.
29-30. who is more wicked ... God’s judgment: To bring passion to
God’s judgment would seem to be “to refuse to accept it calmly or with satisfaction.” But the meaning of line 30 is disputed; the issue is whether the lines are
directed against the nature of the sin or against Dante’s weeping. See Additional
Note 8.
31. Raise your head, raise it: That is, stop weeping and try to understand
the nature of this sin (Ramat 1976).

31-36. the one for whom. . . Minos: Amphiaraus, one of the Seven against
Thebes, known to Dante in Statius’s Thebaid. One ofStatius’s noblest figures,
he is commanded by the king of Argos to perform augury (foretelling the future from the flight of birds) on the outcome of the war against Thebes. Later,
he is the first of the Seven to die, as the earth opens and he rides in his chariot
down to Hades and confronts Pluto, god of the underworld (7.688—8.126).
Dante’s lines conflate two passages, the words of Pluto to Amphiaraus, “quo
ruis?” and the taunts of the Thebans. Amphiaraus is discussed further in Additional Note 8.

33. Where are you rushing: There is a taunting reference to the fact that
Amphiaraus, having foreseen the defeat of the Greeks, including the deaths of
six of the seven heroes, including himself (3.460—551), at first refuses to partici-

pate in the war against Thebes; he is compelled to do so by his greedy wife, who
accepts a bribe (Dante refers to the incident in Purg. 12.49—51). Italian mui can
mean both “fall” and “rush, hasten.”

37-39. Look how . . . a backward path: In these lines the contrapasso is made
explicit. The emphasis on the physical distortion of the punishment is repeated
in the case of each of the five classical figures (Tiresias and Arruns, lines 40—46;
Manto, lines 52-55; and Eurypylus, lines 106-13); with the moderns the insis-

tence is dropped. For “a backward path,” see Purg. 10.121—29.

HU)

Inferno

40-45. See Tiresias . . . his male plumage: Dante knew of Tiresias’s change
of sex through Ovid, Met. 3.324-31, which he echoes in sembiante (“shape,”
line 40; cf. Met. 3.331), femmina (“female,” line 41; cf. 3.326), ribattere and riavesse
(“to strike again” and “to regain,” lines 43 and 45; cf. 3.327, 331: rursus [again],

redit [returns]). In Ovid’s account, Tiresias of Thebes separates two copulating
serpents with his staff and becomes a woman; seven years later he comes upon
them again and again separates them, returning to male shape. When Jupiter and
Juno have a dispute as to which sex has greater pleasure in intercourse, Tiresias
declares that women do, whereupon Juno, angry at the revelation of the secret,
blinds him. In compensation, Jupiter grants him to see the future. He was the
most famous soothsayer of Greco-Roman tradition. See Additional Note 8.
45. regain his male plumage: That is, his beard; for feathers as beard, see

Purg. 1.42, of Cato. There is also a pun on Italian pene [penis].

46-51. Arruns.. . the sea was not cut off: Arruns is a soothsayer in Lucan’s
Pharsalia (1.585—638) who foresees from the entrails of an ox the disastrous consequences of the civil war betweeen Caesar and Pompey, but does not tell all he
sees, wrapping his prophecies in ambiguities. According to Lucan, he lived in
the ruins of the city Lucca; Dante places him in the nearby mountains of Luna,

where his horizons were vast (lines 50-51), in ironic contrast to his present situation, where all he can see is Tiresias’s belly (Caccia 1967; Ramat 1976). His

cave, too, would seem to anticipate his place in Hell.

52-56. And she who covers ... where I was born: Tiresias’s daughter
Manto figures largely in Statius’s Thebaid as his assistant. The idea that she
“searched through many lands” apparently derives from Aen. 10.198—201, as
interpreted by Servius:
Ille etiam patriis agmen ciet Ocnus ab oris,
fatidicae Mantus et Tusci filius amnis,

qui muros matrisque dedit tibi, Mantua, nomen,
Mantua dives avis. . . .
[He, too, calls forth his troop from his father’s shore,
Ocnus, son of fate-speaking Manto and the Tuscan river,

who gave walls to you, Mantua, and his mother’s name,
Mantua, rich in ancestors. . . .|
According to Servius, the Theban Manto came to Italy after her father’s death

and gave birth to Ocnus by the river god Tiber (whose source is in Tuscany).

54. every hairy skin on the other side: That is, the long hair of her head,
the hair of her armpits, and her pubic hair are all turned away from the pilgrim.

314

Notes to Canto 20

58-99. After her father departed ... no lie defraud the truth: Virgil’s
long digression on the foundation of his birthplace, Mantua (see 1.68-69), has
excited much comment, since it has seemed to most critics to contradict the brief

notice in the Aeneid cited in the previous note. See Additional Note 8. One of
its effects is to contrast the vivid reality of the geography of Italy with the unreality of soothsaying, both ancient and modern.
58-59. After ... the city of Bacchus was enslaved: After the war of the
Seven against Thebes, the city was conquered by the Athenians under Theseus
(Thebaid 12).
61-66. Up in beautiful Italy ... collects in that lake: Benacus was the
Latin name for the lake now known as the Lago di Garda, at the foot of the
Tyrolean Alps. It is the easternmost and the largest of the lakes of northern Italy,
thirty-two miles long and eleven miles wide at its widest point. Garda is a city
on the eastern shore; Valcamonica is the largest of the alpine valleys north of
Brescia (thus northwest of the lake); the Alps (in Dante’s term, Pennino) stand
for the territory to the north of the lake.
67-69. In the center . . . if they made the journey: In other words, the
boundaries of the three dioceses of Brescia (to the west), Trento (to the northeast), and Verona (to the southeast) all meet at a point in the center of the lake
(usually identified as the island of Lechi), from which each of the bishops could

officially bless, since their jurisdictions overlapped there. Like the reference to
litanies in line 9, the reference recalls the theme of the efficacy of prayer.
70-72. Peschiera . . . where the shore around it is lowest: Peschiera is a
city at the southernmost point of the lake, controlled in Dante’s time by the

lords of Verona, the Scaligeni.

78. Governolo: Governolo is just over a mile north of the joining of the Mincio
with the Po.

79-81. It has not flowed ... often noxious: The swamp formed by the
Mincio, eventually the site of Mantua, is about thirty-one miles south of Peschiera
(some twelve miles farther, the Mincio flows into the Po). The site was unhealthy
because of malaria.
82. the harsh virgin: Manto, a virgin as in Statius. This is the first departure
from Vergil’s account in Aeneid 10, which has Manto mate with the river god Tiber.
87. her empty body: After her death her body was no longer filled with her
soul (cf. 9.25: “My flesh had been naked of me. . .”).

eriLey

Inferno

88-93. The people . . . other augury: Virgil here corrects the Aeneid on two
points: first, Tiresias’s line was extinct with Manto; there is no genetic connection between it and Mantua, and Manto had no other kind of connection with
the inhabitants of the region, who were “scattered”; second, Mantua was founded

without recourse to the sin of divination (as might seem implied by the account
in the Aeneid); modern theories on the founding of Mantua see the name as indigenous. See Additional Note 8.
94-96. The people housed there . . . Pinamonte: The events referred to
in these lines took place in 1291, when Alberto of Casalodi, ruler of Mantua,

was tricked by Pinamonte de’ Buonaccolsi into withdrawing most of his (noble)
supporters from the city. Pinamonte then, with the aid of the rebellious populace, took over the city and, according to the early commentators, had most of

the noble families massacred.

97-99. Therefore I advise you ... let no lie defraud the truth: Virgil’s
curious self-correction is discussed in Additional Note 8.

106-14. That one ... through and through: Eurypylus is mentioned by
Sinon in Aen. 2.114 as sent by the Greeks to the Delphic oracle to learn the
future of the war; in Sinon’s lying account, the oracle’s discouraging reply causes
the Greeks to sail for home. That Eurypylus was a soothsayer, an associate of
Calchas, is Dante’s reasonable enough inference from Vergil’s lines, since Sinon

could only be naming him to increase the verisimilitude of his account; furthermore, Servius’s note can be read to mean that Eurypylus had access to the inner

shrine of the Delphic temple, in which case he would have to be a priest of Apollo,
like Calchas (D’Ovidio 1901).
108. when Greece was emptied of males: By the Trojan War.
110-11.

along with Calchas ... in Aulis: Dante knew from Vergil (Aen.

2.116—17), Servius, and Ovid (Met. 12.4—39) the story of how storms kept the

Greek fleet in Aulis until the augur Calchas reveals that the anger of Diana must
be appeased by the sacrifice of Iphigenia, young daughter of Agamemnon and
Clytemnestra (Ovid’s passage includes an account of prophecy from birds by
which Calchas predicts the outcome of the war; it is one of the sources of Statius’s

account in Thebaid 3). It is tempting to think that Dante might have known
Lucretius’s description of the sacrifice of Iphigenia as one of the chief crimes
caused by pagan superstition (De rerum natura, 1.84—101).

113. my high tragedy: Virgil is of course referring to the Aeneid; the contrast
between the two genres represented by his poem and the Comedy is implied again
Hi te2,

316

Notes to Canto 20

115-17. That other . . . magic frauds: Michael the Scot was in the service
of the emperor Frederick II and the author of numerous treatises and translations from Greek and Arabic; he was said to have died after 1290.

118. Guido Bonatti: Guido Bonatti of Forli was another famous astrologer
and author, prominent among the Ghibellines of Romagna. Born around 1220,
he served, successively, the empereror Frederick II, the Conti Guidi (see the
note to 16.34—39), and Guido da Montefeltro (Canto 27); he seems to have been

alive in 1296.
118-20. Asdente ... repents too late: Dante mentions Asdente (the name
probably means “toothless”), a cobbler who achieved fame as a soothsayer, as
the most famous person in Parma (Convivio 4.16.6).

124-26. Cain with his thorns . . . touches the wave below Seville: That
is, as seen from Jerusalem the moon is setting (crossing the horizon between the
hemisphere of land and that of ocean) south of Seville; since according to line
127 the moon was full (i.e., directly opposite the sun) yesterday, the sun is now
rising: it is the morning of Holy Saturday. Widespread popular tradition identified the image in the moon as that of Cain carrying a bundle of brambles on his
back.

127-29.

already last night . . . in the deep forest: The account of Dante’s

night in the forest in Canto 1 does not refer to the moon. In actual fact, the full

moon in April 1300 took place on April 3.
130. meanwhile: Dante’s word introcque (derived from Latin inter hoc) has
occasioned comment because he cites it in De vulgari eloquentia 1.13.1 as a
Florentine dialect word unworthy of the “tragic” or high style (see the note
to.21-2):

BAY

GANTO*21

Cosi di ponte in ponte, altro parlando
che la mia comedia cantar non cura,
venimmo, e tenavamo ’] colmo quando

10

13

16

i)

restammo per veder l’altra fessura
di Malebolge e li altri pianti vani;
e vidila mirabilmente oscura.
Quale ne l’arzana de’ Viniziani
bolle l’inverno la tenace pece
a rimpalmare i legni lor non sani,
ché navicar non ponno; in quella vece
chi fa suo legno novo e chi ristoppa
le coste a quel che piu viaggi fece,
chi ribatte da proda e chi da poppa,
altri fa remi e altri volge sarte,
chi terzeruolo e artimon rintoppa:
tal, non per foco ma per divin’ arte,
bollia la giuso una pegola spessa
che ’nviscava la ripa d’ogne parte.
I’ vedea lei, ma non vedéa in essa

mai che le bolle che ’] bollor levava,
22

e gonfiar tutta, e riseder compressa.
Mentr’ io 1a git fisamente mirava,
lo duca mio, dicendo: “Guarda, guarda!”

25

28

mi trasse a sé del loco dov’ io stava.
Allor mi volsi come l’uom cui tarda
di veder quel che li convien fuggire
e cui paura subita sgagliarda,
che, per veder, non indugia ’] partire:
e vidi dietro a noi un diavol nero
correndo su per lo scoglio venire.

318

CANO:

|

Fifth bolgia: barrators—the Evil Claws—parley with the demons—
strange signal

Thus we went from bridge to bridge, speaking of
other things my comedy does not record; and we
were at the summit when
we stood still to see the next cleft of Malebolge
and the next vain weeping; and I saw it to be
wondrously dark.
As in the Venetians’ arsenal in winter the
tenacious pitch boils to recaulk their worn ships,
10

is

for they cannot sail; instead this man works on a
new ship, that one plugs the ribs of a craft that has
made many voyages,
this one repairs at the prow, this one at the stern,
another makes oars, another twists shrouds, another

16

19

22

25

28

patches foresail and mainsail:
so, heated not by fire but by God’s art, a thick
pitch boiled there that clung to the banks on every
side.
I saw it, but in it I saw nothing but the bubbles
that the boiling brought up, and the pitch all swelling
out and subsiding deflated.
While I was gazing fixedly down at it, my leader,
saying: “Look out, look out!” drew me from where |
was standing.
Then I turned, like one eager to see what he must
escape, whom sudden fear robs of vigor,
and, though he looks, does not delay departure;

and I saw behind us a black devil running along the
ridge.

319

Inferno

Sil

34

Si

40

Ahi quant’ elli era ne l’aspetto fero!
e quanto mi parea ne l’atto acerbo
con l’ali aperte e sovra i pié leggero!
L’omero suo, ch’era aguto e superbo,

carcava un peccator con ambo I’anche,
e quei tenea de’ pié ghermito ’] nerbo.
Del nostro ponte disse: “O Malebranche,
ecco un de li anzian di Santa Zita!
Mettetel sotto, ch’i’ torno per anche
a quella terra, che n’é ben fornita:
ogn’ uom v’é barattier, fuor che Bonturo;

43

del no, per li denar, vi si fa ita.”
La giu ’| butto, e per lo scoglio duro
si volse;

e mai non fu mastino sciolto

con tanta fretta a seguitar lo furo.
46

49

Quel s’attuffo, e tornd su convolto;

ma i demon che del ponte avean coperchio,
gridar: “Qui non ha loco il Santo Volto!
Qui si nuota altrimenti che nel Serchio!
Pero, se tu non vuo’ di nostri graffi,

52

non far sopra la pegola soverchio.”
Poi l’addentar con pit di cento raffi,
disser: “Coverto convien che qui balli,
si che, se puoi, nascosamente accaffi.”

55

58

61

Non altrimenti i cuoci a’ lor vassalli
fanno attuffare in mezzo la caldaia
la carne con li uncin, perché non galli.
Lo buon maestro: “Accio che non si paia
che tu ci sia,” mi disse, “git t’acquatta
dopo uno scheggio, ch’alcun schermo t’aia;
e per nulla offension che mi sia fatta,
non temer tu, ch’i’ ho le cose conte,

64

67

per ch’altra volta fui a tal baratta.”
Poscia passo di 1a dal co del ponte;
e com’ el giunse in su la ripa sesta,
mestier li fu d’aver sicura fronte.
Con quel furore e con quella tempesta
ch’escono i cani a dosso al poverello,
che di subito chiede ove s’arresta,
320

Canto 21

31

Ah, how fierce he looked! and how cruel his

bearing seemed to me with his opened wings, so
light on his feet!
34

His shoulder, which was sharp and high, was

37

loaded down with a sinner’s two hips, and he held
hooked with his claw the sinews of both feet.
From our bridge he said: “O Evil Claws, here is
one of the elders of Santa Zita! Put him under, I am

40

43

46

49

52

5D

58

going back for more
to that city, which is well supplied with them:
every one is a grafter there, except Bonturo; for
money there they turn ‘no’ into ‘yes.’”
He threw him down and turned on the stony
ridge; and never was a mastiff loosed with more
haste to pursue a thief.
The sinner plunged, and came back to the surface
bottom up: but the demons hidden beneath the
bridge cried: “Here we don’t show the Holy Face!
Here the swimming is different than in the
Serchio! So, if you don’t want to feel our grapples,
don’t protrude above the pitch.”
After they made him feel the teeth of a hundred
prongs, they said: “Down here you have to dance
covered up and, if you can, grab secretly.”
Not otherwise do cooks have their servants push
down with hooks the meat cooking in a broth, so
that it may not float.
My good master said to me: “So it may not appear
that you are here, squat down behind a projecting
rock to hide;

61

64

and no matter what harm they offer me, do not
you be afraid, for I have foreseen everything; I have
already been present at these deals.”
Then he passed beyond the bridgehead; and as he
reached the sixth bank, he needed to have a

67

confident brow.
With the fury and tempestuous noise of dogs
coming out at a poor man, who stops and begs from
where he stands,
SY4a|

Inferno

70

Wes

76

79

usciron quei di sotto al ponticello,
e volser contra lui tutt’ i runcigli;
ma el grido: “Nessun di voi sia fello!
Innanzi che l’uncin vostro mi pigli,
traggasi avante l’un di voi che m’oda,
e poi d’arruncigliarmi si consigli.”
Tutti gridaron: “Vada Malacoda!”
per ch’un si mosse—e li altri stetter fermi—
e venne a lui, dicendo: “Che li approda?”
“Credi tu, Malacoda, qui vedermi

esser venuto,”’ disse ’] mio maestro,
“sicuro gia da tutti vostri schermi,
82

sanza voler divino e fato destro?
Lascian’ andar, ché nel cielo é voluto

85

ch’i’ mostri altrui questo cammin silvestro.”
Allor li fu ’orgoglio si caduto
ch’e’ si lascio cascar l’uncino a’ piedi,

e disse a li altri, “Omai non sia feruto.”
88

E ’] duca mio a me: “O tu che siedi
tra li scheggion del ponte quatto quatto,
sicuramente omai a me tu riedi.”

91

Per ch’io mi mossi e a lui venni ratto;

e i diavoli si fecer tutti avanti,

94

97

si ch’io temetti ch’ei tenesser patto:
cosi vid’ io gia temer li fanti
ch’uscivan patteggiati di Caprona,
veggendo sé tra nemici cotanti.
Il’ m’accostai con tutta la persona
lungo ’] mio duca, e non torceva li occhi

da la sembianza lor, ch’era non buona.
100

103

106

Ei chinavan li raffi, e: “Vuo’ che ’! tocchi,”

diceva l’un con l’altro, “in sul groppone?”
E nispondien: “Si, fa che gliel’accocchi.”
Ma quel demonio che tenea sermone
col duca mio, si volse tutto presto
e disse: “Posa, posa, Scarmiglione!”
Poi disse a noi: “Piu oltre andar per questo
iscoglio non si puod, pero che giace
tutto spezzato al fondo l’arco sesto.
O22

Canto 21

70

13

76

so they came forth from under the bridge, and

pointed all their grappling hooks toward him; but he
cried: “Let none of you think to harm!
Before your hooks seize me, let one of you come
forward to hear me, and then you may take counsel
to grapplehook me.”
All cried: “Let Evil Tail go!” and one stepped
forth while the others stood still, and came to Virgil,

79)
82

85

saying, “What good will it do him?”
“Do you think, Evil Tail, that you see me here,”
said my master, “once already safe from all your tricks,
without God’s will and favorable fate? Allow us
to walk on, for it is willed in Heaven that I guide
someone on this savage journey.”
Then his pride fell so that he let his hook droop to
his feet, and he said to the others: ““_Now he mustn’t

88

Oil

be gored.”
And my leader to me: “O you, sitting among the
rocks of the bridge all asquat, you can return to me
safely now.”
Therefore I moved and went to him swiftly; and
the devils all started forward, so that I was afraid

they would not keep the pact:

94

thus once I saw the foot-soldiers fear, coming out

of Caprona under safe-conduct, seeing themselves
among so many enemies.
97

100

I drew close to my leader with all my person, and
I did not turn my eyes from their expression, which
was not good.
They pointed their prongs, and: “Want me to
nudge him,” one said to the other, “on the rump?”

103

And they replied: “Yes, give it to him in the notch.”
But that demon who was parleying with my
leader, turned swiftly about, saying, “Down, down,

106

Tangle Head!”
Then he said to us: “Further along this ndge you
cannot go, for the sixth arch lies all shattered at the
bottom.

BES}

Inferno

109

112

115

E se l’andare avante pur vi piace,
andatevene su per questa grotta:
presso é un altro scoglio che via face.
ler, piu oltre cinqu’ ore che quest’ otta,
mille dugento con sessanta sei
anni compieé che qui la via fu rotta.
Io mando verso 1a di questi miei
a riguardar s’alcun se ne sciorina:
gite con lor, che non saranno rei.”

118

“Tra’ti avante, Alichino, e Calcabrina,”
comincio elli a dire, “e tu, Cagnazzo;

121

124

127)

e Barbariccia guidi la decina.
Libicocco vegn’ oltre e Draghignazzo,
Ciriatto sannuto e Graffiacane
e Farfarello e Rubicante pazzo.
Cercate ’ntorno le boglienti pane:
costor sian salvi infin a l’altro scheggio
che tutto intero va sovra le tane.”
“Ome, maestro, che é quel ch’i’ veggio?”
diss’ io, “deh, sanza scorta andianci soli,

se tu sa’ ir; ch’i’ per me non la cheggio.
130

153

136

Se tu se’ si accorto come suoli,

non vedi tu ch’e’ digrignan li denti
e con le ciglia ne minaccian duoli?”
Ed elli a me: “Non vo’ che tu paventi;
lasciali digrignar pur a lor senno,
ch’e’ fanno cio per li lessi dolenti.”
Per l’argine sinistro volta dienno;
ma prima avea ciascun la lingua stretta
coi denti verso lor duca, per cenno,

139

ed elli avea del cul fatto trombetta.

324

Canto 21

109
112

115

118

121

124

127

130

133

136

But if you still wish to go forward, walk along this
bank: nearby is another ridge that makes a path.
Yesterday, five hours later than now, one

thousand two hundred and sixty-six years were
completed since the way was broken here.
I am sending some of these in that direction, to
see if anyone is airing himself: go with them, they
will not be troublesome.”
“Come forward, Harlequin, Trample Frost,” he

began to say, “and you, Evil Dog; and Curly Beard
command the squad.
Love Notch, come here, and Little Big Dragon, Big
Pig with his tusks, and Scratching Dog, and Butterfly
and crazy Ruby Face.
Inspect the boiling birdlime; let these be safe until
the next ridge that goes undamaged over the pits.”
“Oh me, master, what do I see?” I said, “Ah, let us

go alone, without escort, if you know the way; I
don’t ask it for myself.
If you are as alert as usual, don’t you see how
they are grinding their teeth, and how their eyebrows
threaten treachery?”
And he to me: “I would not have you fear: let
them snarl as much as they please, they are doing
that for the sufferers in the stew.”
They made left face on the bank; but first each

had bit his tongue toward their leader, as a salute,
159)

and he of his ass had made a trumpet.

as

325;

NOTES

1-2. Thus we went ... does not record: For the self-conscious opening,
see note to 18.1-18. “Speaking of other things” picks up the last line of
Canto 20.
2. my comedy: With 16.128—29, 21.2 would give ample authority for the
title of the poem, even if we lacked the unanimous testimony of the manuscripts.
Following closely on Virgil’s mention of his “high tragedy” (20.113), this is the
second and last appearance of the word comedia in the poem. The term characterizes both the style and the subject matter of the poem and, in conjunction
with 20.113, contrasts them sharply with those of the Aeneid; its use at the

beginning of the present canto is programmatic. In De vulgari eloquentia, Book
2, Dante had defined the highest style as the tragic, consisting of the noblest and
most

harmonious

words,

using the highest forms

(the canzone

and

the

hendecasyllable) and rhetorical constructions, and singing only the noblest subjects (the implicit model, adapted to the vernacular, is, of course, Vergil); comedy he associated with “sometimes the middle level of the vernacular, sometimes the low” (2.4.5). In the Epistle to Can Grande (of disputed authenticity)

the genres are defined by the nature of their plots or subject matter, tragedy as
“beginning happily and admirably, ending horribly,” comedy as “beginning in
difficulty but ending prosperously.”
As Auerbach (1953) showed, the Comedy represents a new conception in which
the many levels of subject matter, ranging from the most abject to the most sublime and apocalyptic, require all levels of vocabulary and style, from the most
familiar (cf. 32.1—9), dialectal (see 20.130, with note), and obscene (cf. Canto

18 and the present one), to the most learned and technically precise, including
Latinisms and neologisms.
7-18. As in the Venetians’ arsenal ... on every side: The term arsenal
(derived from an Arabic word meaning “factory”) was narrowed in Italian to
mean “shipyard.” In Dante’s time, Venice had the most powerful navy in Europe; the site of its shipyard still exists. While formally positive (i.e., the infernal
pitch is said to be like the Venetian), in fact the simile sharply contrasts the elaborate scene of organized and purposeful social activity in the Arsenal with the
solitude and silence of the infernal scene (and, by implication, with the later rowdy
undiscipline and futile malice of the devils). The relevance of the ship imagery
to the contrapasso is discussed in the note to lines 53-54.

29-45. a black devil . . . to pursue a thief: This devil’s function—seizing
the damned at death and carrying them to Hell (frequently represented in folklore and art; see Hughes 1968)—corresponds to that of the devils mentioned in

326

Notes to Canto 21

27.113—29 and Purg. 5.103-14, though it
might seem excluded by the scene beside the
Acheron (3.70-129).
29-33. a black devil . . . light on his feet:
The traditional medieval horned devils (Figure 4), perhaps to be understood in 8.83
(“rained down”), were introduced in 18.35—
36, where their wings were not mentioned;

their malicious sarcasms were given prominence there, however, as they will be here.

31-32. Ah, how fierce ... how

cruel:

Note the parallel with 1.4, of the dark wood.
34-36. His shoulder ... both feet: In
other words, the devil has thrust his claw

through the sinner’s ankles, hooking his
Achilles’ tendons; he has then slung the sin-

ner over one shoulder, as ifhe were a butcher

Figure 4. A medieval devil. (Based on

carrying a slaughtered animal. The implicit

an illumination in a manuscript of the

metaphor is picked up in line 55. Kleinhenz —Comedy)
(1982) suggests there is a parodic reference
to the well-known iconographic motif of the Good Shepherd carrying the lost
lamb on his shoulders.
37. O Evil Claws: Evidently the collective name of the devils of this ditch;

Dante surpasses himself in inventiveness of names in this canto (see the note to
lines 118-23).

38. one of the elders of Santa Zita: Saint Zita had died around 1278 and
was much venerated in her home city of Lucca; she had not yet been canonized
in 1300. The elders of Santa Zita are the magistrates of the republican (and Guelf)
city of Lucca. Guido da Pisa, an early commentator, identified this soul as one
Martino Bottaio, a political boss, like Bonturo Dati (see the note to line 41).
When Dante was writing, Lucca, like Florence, was dominated by the Black

faction of Guelfs (discussed in the note to 6.64—72).

39. for more: The Italian per anche allows a pun on “hips” (line 35).

41. every one is a grafter there, except Bonturo: Bonturo Dati (d. after 1324)
was the political boss of Lucca; the line is obviously ironic. Lucca follows Bologna
(Canto 18), as the next Italian city to be denounced (see the note to 26.1—3).

42. for money there they turn ‘no’ into ‘yes’: This amounts to a definition ofbarratry or graft: accepting bribes to change refusal (“no”) into consent

32]

Inferno

(ita is a Latin form of “yes”; cf. sipa, 18.61), perhaps to what is illegal or disloyal
(cf. the examples in Canto 22).
44—45.

never was a mastiff ... to pursue a thief: That is, than was the

devil returning to Lucca for more thieves. The devils are also compared to dogs
in lines 67-69 (see the note to 22.19—21).
46-48. The sinner plunged . . . Holy Face: The “Holy Face” was an ebony
statue of the crucified Christ venerated in Lucca, supposed to have been carved
by the apostle Nicodemus, except for the face, which was miraculously completed while he slept (Fallani 1976). The devils’ taunt is at least two-fold, since

the pitch makes the sinner black, and it is his nether cheeks that are being compared to the face of Christ (Singleton)—another parodic reference to the Crucifixion. There is probably also a reference to the fact that the “Holy Face”
appeared on Lucca coins (Varanini 1989): thus no profits are to be made here.
49. the Serchio: The river near Lucca, popular for swimming in the summer,

according to the early commentators.
53-54. you have to dance... grab secretly: There is of course nothing to
grab here except the pitch itself (cf. the meiosis of avarice in Canto 7); the line
is an obvious reference to the secret grabbing the sinners did in life, and it suggests one dimension of the contrapasso. But what is it that facilitates the grafters’
thefts in life? There seems a clear reference to their positions of authority and to
the public’s (or their lords’) presumptive trust in them. In his treatise on the unity
of the Church, Augustine interprets the pitch that seals Noah’s ark (a symbol of
the Church) as signifying the bond of love that holds it together. Dante has transferred this idea to the traditional notion of the ship of state (already used by him
in Convivio 4.4.5—7). Hence the relevance of the opening simile of the caulking
of ships, as well as the important parallel with the simoniacs, who are being pushed
down into the clefts of the rock as if they were caulking. Barratry or graft is a
kind of secular equivalent of simony.

55-57. Not otherwise do cooks . . . not float: The importance of food and
cooking imagery in the Malebolge is discussed in Additional Note 13.
63. at these deals: Dante’s word baratta has been taken by most commentators as meaning “struggle” or “battle,” but that baratta also meant “exchange” or
“deal” for Dante’s period is amply testified and is much more appropriate to the
theme of the canto, especially since Evil Tail will try to deceive Virgil.
64-139. Then he passed .. . a trumpet: The many parallels between this
episode of negotiation with devils and that in Cantos 8 and 9 have often been
pointed out.

328

Notes to Canto 21

67-70. With the fury . . . from under the bridge: The simile helps set off
Virgil’s confidence (overconfidence? [see lines 127—35]), so different from the
beggar’s timidity; it is one of a series emphasizing various forms of oppression
and violence—scenes of the defenseless confronted with pitiless enemies:
unarmed, defeated foot soldiers (lines 94-96), a captured otter (22.36), and a
mouse among cats (22.58). As Favati (1965) showed, in having the devils erupt
from beneath the bridge, Dante is alluding to the trapdoor from which the devils

came on stage in miracle plays, filled with humor at the devils’ expense.
74. let one of you come forward: Virgil has not, it seems, recognized any
of these devils or remembered their names from his earlier visit.
76. Evil Tail: The devils’ names are discussed in the note to lines 118-23.

79-81. Do you think, Evil Tail . . . all your tricks: In other words, Virgil’s
previous descent (see 9.22—30, with notes) brought opposition and trickery from
the Evil Claws (note that vostri [your] in line 81 is a plural), which Virgil successively warded off.
84. this savage journey: Or, way in the wilderness; the line echoes 2.142.
85-87. then his pride fell . . . mustn’t be gored: Evil Tail’s comic pantomime of impotence derives from the traditionally nbald treatment of devils in
medieval drama, but it conceals his intention to deceive.

88-90. And my leader . . . to me safely now: The sound effects of the Italian, especially quatto quatto [all asquat] emphasize the pilgrim’s comically undignified posture.

92. the devils all started forward: The devils are surprised to see a living
person, and their blood lust is particularly stirred.
94-96. thus once I saw . . . so many enemies: As we learn only from this
passage, Dante was present at the siege and surrender of Caprona, a Pisan stronghold, in August 1289, probably as one of the mounted soldiers (see note to lines

67—70). The terms of the simile involve a reversal between then and now: Dante
was one of the “many enemies” then; now he is in the position of the defeated

soldiers, and the devils correspond to the Florentine troops (Favati 1965); this
passage and 22.1—12 constitute the only references in the Comedy to Dante’s military careeer. See Additional Note 9.
102. give it to him in the notch: The Italian accoccare is formed from the
noun cocca, the notch of an arrow or crossbow bolt, and means “to fit the notch

to the bowstring.” Most commentators take the allusion as generic: “let fly at

329°

Inferno

him,” that is, “release the arrow.” But the word would seem to involve a more
exact reference.

105. Tangle Head: Scarmiglione (Tangle Head) is formed from the verb carminare
[to card, comb wool], plus the privative s-.
106-14. Further along . . . the way was broken here: Evil Tail speaks an
artful mixture of truth and falsehood. It is true that the way is cut off at the bolgia
because the bridge has fallen (lines 106-9); it is false that there is an undamaged
bridge nearby. The masterful touch is in lines 112-14, whose correct—and
pedantically accurate—dating of the earthquake distracts from the question of
the bridges. Evil Tail remembers that since Virgil’s previous visit was prior to
Christ’s death (9.2527), Virgil cannot know which bridges are fallen.
112-14. Yesterday, five hours ... the way was broken here: The way
was broken by the great earthquake at Christ’s death (12.31—45). “Yesterday”
was Good Friday; “five hours later than now” would be noon (apparently an
hour has elapsed since 20.124—29). Dante accepted Luke’s statement (23.44—47)
that Christ died at about noon; Christ was thought to have died in his thirtyfifth year, thus in a.p. 34. This passage dates the action of the Comedy as taking
place in 1300 (it is the only place in the poem where the exact date is stated).
Since Dante’s birthday was in all probability in late May, the pilgrim has undertaken the journey in his thirty-fifth year, an additional element in the imitation
of Christ that subtends the poem (discussed in the note to 1.91).

118-23. Come forward ... Ruby Face: We translate most of the devils’
names literally. Like Evil Claws (Malebranche, line 37), Evil Pockets (Malebolge,
18.1, 21.5, etc.), and Evil Tail (Malacoda), most of them join two words. Harle-

quin (Alichino) is the modern French form of the traditional leader of the wild
infernal hunt (drawn on in 13.109-29). Cagnazzo (Evil Dog) is formed from
cane and the pejorative suffix -azzo. Libicocco (Love Notch) we hypothesize to be a
formation from Latin libet [it is pleasing] and Italian cocca (see line 102, with note);
Spitzer (1943) argued that it was a deformation of biricoccola, a Tuscan word for
“apricot,” used in many Romance languages as a metaphor for the female organ.
Draghignazzo (Little Big Dragon) we take as formed from draco [dragon], plus the
diminutive suffix -ino, plus -azzo. Ciriatto (Big Pig) is generally taken to be derived from a Greek word for “pig.”’ Rubicante (Ruby Face) is formed as a present
participle. Of the twelve names, six (Evil Tail, Evil Dog, Little Big Dragon, Big
Pig, Scratching Dog, and Butterfly) are explicitly bestial, like the collective name
Evil Claws; several others have bestial connotations.

A number of the devils’ names

seem to play on the names of prominent persons and families in Florence and
Lucca. Scholars have amply demonstrated the basis of Dante’s representation of
these devils in medieval (especially French) miracle plays, in which they are ribald,
sarcastic, obscene, and—of course—always defeated. Dante’s names for the devils

are a pastiche of names assigned to them in popular tradition and drama.

330

Notes to Canto 21

120. Curly Beard command the squad: “Squad” translates decina [unit of
ten], the basic organizational unit of the Roman legions, to whose officer (the
decurio) Curly Beard’s new command alludes (see 22.74).

125-26. let these be safe . . . over the pits: Evil Tail’s words are obviously
meant as license to the devils to do as they will with the travelers, once past the
next ruined bridge, but, curiously enough, if taken strictly, the words would

prevent all license, since if there is no bridge, no limit is set to the travelers’ safety.
127-35. Oh me, master . . . in the stew: The pilgrim reacts intuitively and
directly to the devils, and he sees—correctly—that they mean harm and “threaten
treachery.” Virgil, however, has been taken in by Evil Tail, perhaps because of
overconfidence.
132. how their eyebrows threaten treachery: The lowering and knitting
of the devils’ brows is referred to (cf. line 66).
135. stew: The Italian lessi [boiled] is usually used of boiled meat and other
foods.

137-39. but first . . made a trumpet: The leader (duca) of the ten is Curly
Beard; it is to him the devils stick out their tongues, acknowledging his authority, and, as the beginning of the next canto will make clear, it is he who farts,

giving the signal for their departure, all in grotesque parody of military discipline. Benvenuto says that the devils’ grimace is called trullizare, explained by
Camporesi (1985) as “an act miming the effort of defecation” (cf. 28.24).
Roncaglia (1971) shows that the fart, like “kitchen humor,” is a traditional part
of low “comic” style, discussed in medieval treatises (and cf. the indignity visited on the soothsayers, 20.10—24).

331

GANT

Oe22

Io vidi gia cavalier muover campo
e€ cominciare stormo e far lor mostra,

e talvolta partir per loro scampo;
corridor vidi per la terra vostra,
o Aretini, e vidi gir gualdane,
fedir torneamenti e correr giostra,

quando con trombe, e quando con campane,
con tamburi e con cenni di castella,
10

13

16

19

22

D5

e con cose nostrali e con istrane:
né gia con si diversa cennamella
cavalier vidi muover né pedoni,
né nave a segno di terra o di stella.
Noi andavam con i diece demoni.
Ahi fiera compagnia! ma ne la chiesa
coi santi, e in taverna coi ghiottoni.
Pur a la pegola era la mia ’ntesa,
per veder de la bolgia ogne contegno

e de la gente ch’entro v’era incesa.
Come i dalfini, quando fanno segno
a’ marinar con l’arco de la schiena
che s’argomentin di campar lor legno:
talor cosi, ad alleggiar la pena,
mostrav’ alcun de’ peccatori ’1 dosso
e nascondea in men che non balena.
E come a l’orlo de l’acqua d’un fosso
stanno 1 ranocchi pur col muso fuori,

28

si che celano i piedi e l’altro grosso:
si stavan d’ogne parte i peccatori;
ma come s’appressava Barbariccia,
cosi si ritraén sotto 1 bollori.

B92

GAN TOL.
Mock heroic opening—Ciampolo caught, interrogated, escapes—the
pilgrim and Virgil escape

I have seen knights setting forth, beginning
assaults and standing muster, and sometimes
retreating to save themselves;
I have seen mounted men coursing your city, O
Aretines, I have seen foragers riding, tournaments
striking, and jousts running,
sometimes with trumpets, sometimes with bells,

10

13

16

19

Dp)
25)

28

with drums or signals from the tower, with things
both our own and foreign:
but never at so strange a pipe have I seen
horsemen or foot-soldiers setting forth, nor a ship at
a sign from land or star.
We were walking with the ten demons. Ah, fierce
company! but in church with the saints, in the tavern
with the gluttons.
My attention was all given to the pitch, to see
every condition of the moat and of the people burned
in it.
As dolphins do, when they signal to sailors,
arching their spines, to take measures to save their
ship:
so from time to time, to lessen the pain, a sinner
would show his back and hide it in less than a flash.
And as at the edge of a ditch the bullfrogs sit with
only their snouts showing, hiding their feet and thick
bodies:
so on every side did the sinners, but as Curly
Beard came near, like frogs they withdrew into the
boiling.

333

Inferno

31

34

37

40

I’ vidi, e anco il cor me n’accapriccia,

uno aspettar cosi, com’ elli ’ncontra
ch’una rana rimane e I’altra spiccia;
e Graffiacan, che li era piu di contra,
li arrunciglio le ’mpegolate chiome
e trassel su, che mi parve una lontra.
I’ sapea gia di tutti quanti ’] nome,
si li notai quando fuorono eletti,
e poi ch’e’ si chiamaro, attesi come.
“O Rubicante, fa che tu li metti

li unghioni a dosso si che tu lo scuoi!”
gridavan tutti insieme i maladetti.
43

E io: “Maestro mio, fa, se tu puoi,

che tu sappi chi é lo sciagurato
venuto a man de li avversari suoi.”
46

49

By

55

58

Lo duca mio li s’accosto allato;

domandollo ond’ ei fosse, e quei rispuose:
“Y’ fui del regno di Navarra nato.
Mia madre a servo d’un segnor mi puose,
che m’avea generato d’un ribaldo,
distruggitor di sé e di sue cose.
Poi fui famiglia del buon re Tebaldo;
quivi mi misi a far baratteria,
di ch’io rendo ragione in questo caldo.”
E Ciriatto, a cui di bocca uscia

d’ogne parte una sanna come a porco,
li fe sentir come luna sdruscia.
Tra male gatte era venuto ’] sorco;
ma Barbariccia il chiuse con le braccia
e disse: “State in la, mentr’ io lo ’nforco.”

61

E al maestro mio volse la faccia:
“Domanda,” disse, “ancor, se pit disii

64

67

saper da lui prima ch’altri ’] disfaccia.”
Lo duca dunque: “Or di: de li altri rii
conosci tu alcun che sia latino
sotto la pece?” E quelli: “I’ mi partii,
poco é, da un che fu di 1a vicino.
Cosi foss’ io ancor con lui coperto,
ch’i’ non temerei unghia né uncino!”
334

Canto 22

31

34

ST

40

43

46

49

oy?

I saw one wait, and my heart still makes me
shudder at it, as sometimes one frog stays while the
other jumps;
and Scratching Dog, who was closest, hooked his
grapple in his pitchy locks and drew him up, so that
he seemed to me like an otter.
I had learned all their names, they made such an
impression on me when they were chosen and when
they called to each other.
“O Ruby Face, see that you get your nails in him
and tear his skin off!” all those cursed ones were
shouting at once.
And I: “My master, see if you can discover who
this wretch is who has come into the hands of his
enemies.”
My master stood alongside him; he asked him
where he was from, and he replied: “I was born in
the kingdom of Navarre.
My mother placed me in the service of a lord; she
had generated me by a wastrel, destroyer of his
wealth and of himself.
Then I was in the household of good king
Thibaut; and there I took to barratry, for which |

55

square accounts in this heat.”
And Big Pig, from whose mouth on each side
came a tusk like a boar’s, let him feel how one of

58

61

64

them could rip.
Among bad cats had the mouse arrived; but Curly
Beard enclosed him with his arms, and said: “Stay
over there, while I have him gripped.”
Then he turned his face toward my master; “Ask
again,” he said, “if you want to know more from him
before someone does him in.”
My leader therefore: “Now say: among the other
sinners under the pitch, do you know any who is
Italian?” And he: “TI left one,

67

a moment ago, who was from near there. Would
I were still hidden with him, I’d not fear claw or
crook!”
BOS

Inferno
70

E Libicocco: “Troppo avem sofferto,”
disse, e preseli ’] braccio col runciglio
si che, stracciando, ne porto un lacerto.

73

76

Draghignazzo anco i volle dar di piglio
giuso a le gambe; onde ’] decurio loro
si volse intorno intorno con mal piglio.
Quand’ elli un poco rappaciati fuoro,
a lui, ch’ancor mirava sua ferita,

79

domando ’] duca mio sanza dimoro:
“Chi fu colui da cui mala partita
di’ che facesti per venire a proda?”
Ed ei rispuose: “Fu frate Gomita,

82

quel di Gallura, vasel d’ogne froda,
ch’ebbe i nemici di suo donno in mano,

85

e fé si lor che ciascun se ne loda:
danar si tolse e lasciolli di piano,
si com’ e’ dice; e ne li altri offici anche

88

91

barattier fu non picciol, ma sovrano.
Usa con esso donno Michel Zanche
di Logodoro; e a dir di Sardigna
le lingue lor non si sentono stanche.
Ome, vedete l’altro che digrigna;
i’ direi anche, ma i’ temo ch’ello

94

97

non s’apparecchi a grattarmi la tigna.”
E ’] gran proposto, volto a Farfarello,
che stralunava li occhi per fedire,
disse: “Fatti ’n costa, malvagio uccello!”
“Se voi volete vedere o udire,”

ricomincio lo spaiirato appresso,
“Toschi
100

o Lombardi, io ne fard venire;

ma stieno i Malebranche un poco in cesso,
si ch’ei non teman de le lor vendette;

103

e 10, seggendo in questo loco stesso,
per un ch’io son, ne faro venir sette
quand’ io suffolerd, com’ é nostro uso

106

di fare allor che fori alcun si mette.”
Cagnazzo a cotal motto levo ’] muso,
crollando ’! capo, e disse: “Odi malizia

ch’elli ha pensata per gittarsi giuso
336

$22

Canto 22

70

And Love Notch said: “We've been patient too
long,” and he hooked one arm with his pruning knife

and pulled, tearing out a muscle.
73

76

79

Little Big Dragon, too, wanted to hook him below,

at the legs; at which their decurion whirled about
with an evil look.
When they had quieted down a little, without
delay my master asked the soul, who was still gazing
at his wound:
“Who was he you say you should not have left for
the shore?” and he replied, “It was Brother Gomita,

82

the one from Gallura, vessel of every fraud, who

85

had his master’s enemies in his hand and treated
them so that each is thankful to him:
he took their money and let them go scot free, as
he tells it; and in his other duties, too, he was not a

88

small barrator, but a champion.
Master Michel Zanche of Logodoro keeps
company with him; and their tongues never tire of
speaking about Sardinia.

91

Oh me, look at this other one snarling; I would

94

say more, but I’m afraid he’s getting ready to scratch
my scurf.”
And the great officer, turning to Butterfly, whose
eyes were bulging to strike, said: “Get over there,

97

100

103

wicked bird!”
“If you want to see or hear,” the terrified wretch
began again, “Tuscans or Lombards, I can make them
come;
but let the Evil Claws stand a little apart, so they
won’t be frightened of their cruelty; and I, sitting
right here,
for one that I am, will make seven come when I
whistle, as is our custom to do when one of us is a

lookout.”
106

At that Evil Dog lifted his snout, shaking his head,

and said: “Listen to the trick he’s thought of, so he
can jump back in!”

337

Inferno

109

Ond’ ei, ch’avea lacciuoli a gran divizia,

112

rispuose: “Malizioso son io troppo,
quand’ io procuro a’ mia maggior trestizia.”
Alichin non si tenne e, di rintoppo
a li altri, disse a lui: “Se tu ti cali,

115

io non ti verro dietro di gualoppo,
ma battero sovra la pece Vali.
Lascisi ’] collo, e sia la ripa scudo,

118

a veder se tu sol piu di noi vali.”
O tu che leggi, udirai nuovo ludo:
ciascun da I’altra costa li occhi volse,

121

124

127

130

quel prima ch’a cio fare era piu crudo.
Lo Navarrese ben suo tempo colse;
fermo le piante a terra, e in un punto
salto e dal proposto lor si sciolse.
Di che ciascun di colpa fu compunto,
ma quei piu che cagion fu del difetto;
pero si mosse e grido: “Tu se’ giunto!”
Ma poco i valse, ché 1’ali al sospetto
non potero avanzar; quelli ando sotto,
e quei drizzo volando suso il petto:
non altrimenti l’anitra di botto,

quando ’] falcon s’appressa, giu s’attuffa,
ed ei ritorna su crucciato e rotto.
133

136

139

142

145

Irato Calcabrina de la buffa,

volando dietro li tenne, invaghito
che quei campasse per aver la zuffa;
e come ’ barattier fu disparito
cosi volse li artigli al suo compagno,
e fu con lui sopra ’] fosso ghermito.
Ma l’altro fu bene sparvier grifagno
ad artigliar ben lui, e amendue
cadder nel mezzo del bogliente stagno.
Lo caldo sghermitor subito fue;
ma pero di levarsi era neente,
si avieno inviscate |’ali sue.
Barbariccia, con li altri suoi dolente,

quattro ne fé volar da l’altra costa
con tutt’ 1 raffi, e assai prestamente
338

Canto 22

109

Therefore he, who had a great wealth of snares,

112

replied: “I am really very tricky, if 1 procure more
suffering for my own kind.”
Harlequin could not hold back and, against the
others, told him: “If you go down, I won’t come after

you at a gallop,
Aili

118

121

124

but beating my wings above the pitch. Let’s leave
the ridge and hide behind the bank, and we'll see if
all by yourself you can outdo us.”
O you who read, you will hear strange sport: each
of them turned his eyes toward the other bank, and
he first who had been most unwilling.
The Navarrese chose his moment well, planted his
feet on the ground, and in one point jumped and
escaped their design.
For that each felt the stab of guilt, but most of all
he who had caused the fault; so he moved, crying:

127

“You’re caught!”
But it did no good, for his wings could not
outspeed the other’s fear; the shade dove under, and

130

133

136

139

142

145

he straightened his breast to fly back up:
not otherwise does the duck suddenly disappear
when the falcon approaches, and he goes back up,
angry and ruffled.
Trample Frost, angered by the trick, was flying
just behind him, hoping the soul would escape, eager
to have a scrap;
and when the barrator had disappeared, he turned
his talons against his fellow, and grappled with him
above the ditch.
But the other was a full-grown hawk to grapple
him, and both of them fell into the boiling pool.
The heat was a quick ungrappler; but not for that
could they come forth, they had so enlimed their
wings.
Curly Beard, grieving with his fellows, sent four
flying to the inner bank with their hooks, and quickly
enough,

339

Inferno

148

di qua, di 1a discesero a la posta;

porser li uncini verso li ’mpaniati,
ch’eran gia cotti dentro da la crosta.
151

E noi lasciammo lor cosi ’mpacciati.

340

Canto 22

148

151

on this side and on that, they flew to their posts;
they held out their hooks toward the viscous ones,
who were already cooked within their crusts.
And we left them thus entangled.

NSge

341

NOTES
1-12. I have seen ... or star: Referring to the last line of Canto 21, this
magnificent mock-epic simile juxtaposes the noblest (the knightly) forms of
warfare and their signals with the grotesquely debased and ineffectual military
discipline of the Evil Claws (the devils, it will be remembered, are at war with

both God and man). At times the catalog descends from heroic assaults and reviews
to retreat (line 3), mere predatory raids (line 5), and a suggestion of civil war
(line 4). The simile is masterfully constructed: note the function of the repeated
“vidi” [I have seen], “quando” [sometimes], and “con/a” [with/at] in articulating and gradually intensifying the accumulation of instances, and the equal division of the four terzine into two groups, one on activities, the other on their
respective signals, returning at the end to horsemen, but expanding the panorama
to include foot soldiers and ships as well. Essential to the effect is that the simile
climaxes in ludicrous non-similarity—like the simile in 21.7—21. The topos of a
list of beautiful things (including martial activities) is the basis of a well-established genre of medieval poetry, the plazer (see the notes to 14.30, 28.22—24).
4-5.

Ihave seen mounted men...

O Aretines: Ina

letter, now lost, quoted

by Leonardo Bruni, Dante claimed to have participated as a mounted soldier in
the battle of Campaldino (June 1289), in Aretine territory. There has been
uncertainty as to whether terra (line 4) here signifies “territory” (in which case
corridor’ means “scouts”) or, as generally accepted today—and as regularly in
Dante—“city” (in which case the reference is to civic disturbances in which
horsemen—corridoricoursed

the city to intimidate and, if possible, kill their

political opponents).
6. tournaments striking, and jousts running: The distinction is between
mass encounters (with swords, principally) on open fields and individual jousts
(with lances) in the lists.

7. sometimes with bells: Italian cities sent forth armies accompanied by great
war wagons which bore, among other equipment, great bells. The captures of
such carri constituted major victories.

12. at a sign from land or star: The term segno [sign], referring to the stars,
signifies “constellation”: the ship would be setting forth at a certain hour (the rising
or transit of a particular star or constellation), perhaps with astrological significance.
The gamut of this catalog of activities and signs ends with the word stella [star],
providing the greatest possible antithesis to the devils’ signals (and one sufficiently
exalted that stelle is the concluding word of each of the three cantiche of the poem).
13. the ten demons: See 21.120, with note.

342

Notes to Canto 22

14-15. in church ... with the gluttons: This striking phrase may already
have been proverbial in Dante’s time; in any case it has been so ever since.

19-21. As dolphins do . . . save their ship: The traditional idea that dolphins
warn sailors of approaching storms goes back at least as far as Isidore of Seville,
Etymologies 12.6.11 (P.L. 82.452); it is frequently mentioned in writers contemporary with Dante. The simile contains the hidden suggestion that some kind of storm
is now approaching. The frequency with which devils and sinners are compared to
animals in this canto has frequently been noted: 19-21, dolphins; 25-27, 32-33,
frogs; 36, otter; 56, boar; 58, cat and mouse; 96, bird; 106, dog’s snout; 114, horse’s
gallop; 130-32, duck and falcon; 139, hawk. The devils are compared to dogs in

21.67—69 (see also the discussion of their names in the note to 21.118—23).

31. my heart still makes me shudder: Again the poet still feels the emotions of the pilgrim.
35. hooked his grapple . . . like an otter: The bases of the comparison are
both the passivity of the captured otter, hanging from the hook or noose with its
limbs dangling, and the sleekness of its wet fur, streaming with water (here, pitch).

Line 35 is perhaps the most striking of the many sound effects in these two cantos
suggesting stickiness and viscosity, partly because it combines elements of the dangers
of both capture and entanglement, the grapplehooks and the pitch.
37-39. I had learned ... to each other: One notes Dante’s care to maintain the verisimilitude of the pilgrim’s point of view. It is of course the pilgrim’s
fear (cf. 21.91—99, 127-32) that we understand to have motivated the exactness
of his memory (see the note to 21.74); the commentators point out that his fear

takes second place to his curiosity “when they were chosen” (21.118—23) and
“when they called” (21.76, 105), and, implicitly, other occasions. Compare
25.40—45. Each of the ten demons is named once in this canto, except for Curly
Beard, who is named three times (lines 29, 59, and 145).

40. O Ruby Face: Now that a sinner has been captured, the rest of the canto
is filled with action and dialogue. Previously, like the pilgrim, the devils have
been silent and on the alert.
45. into the hands of his enemies: Dante’s term is avversari [adversaries],
literally translating New Testament diabolus; we use the word “enemies” in order

to preserve the politically realistic ring of the passage; it reminds us again that
the infernal events are transpositions of earthly ones, probably witnessed by Dante,
such as the merciless interrogations ofprisoners and the fear on the faces of surrendering soldiers (21.94-96). See Additional Note 9.
48. Navarre: A small kingdom in the Pyrenees, in the south of France, integrated into that country in 1598.

343

Inferno
50-51.

she had generated me

... and of himself: In other words, the

unnamed Navarrese (to whom the early commentators attribute the name
Ciampolo, or Jean-Paul) was the illegitimate son of a spendthrift who ultimately
committed suicide (the punishment of both these sins is described in Canto 13).
The use of the term “generated” (generato), usually used of a child’s father, is

striking when applied, as here, to the mother.
52-54. Then I was in the household ... in this heat: Barratry is here
identified as a sin characteristic of underlings; those Ciampolo mentions were
servants and ministers of rulers. Civil servants of republican governments are
included in the reference to Lucca (21.37—42).
52. good king Thibaut: This is probably Thibaut II, king of Navarre (1255—
1270), celebrated for his valor and generosity.
57. let him feel how one of them could rip: We are not told the location
of the ripping wound now inflicted by Big Pig (see line 77 and note).
58. Among bad cats had the mouse arrived: A hint of reference to beast
fables, further developed in 23.4—9.
60. Stay over there ... gripped: The line is addressed to the devils (state
[stay] is plural); “while I have him gripped” translates the more vivid mentr’ io lo
’nforco (literally, while I have him forked].
70. We’ve been patient: The Italian abbiam sofferto [literally, we have suffered]
brings into focus the root meaning of “patient,” from Latin patior, “to suffer,”

with considerable ironic force: Love Notch is impatient to inflict suffering.
74. decurion: See the note to 21.120.

77. gazing at his wound: This is one of the most effectively chilling moments
of the canto, conveying the hallucinated atmosphere of sudden violence and the
shocked amazement of its victims.
81-87. Brother Gomita ... a champion: Galluria was one of the four
administrative districts of Sardinia; according to the early commentators, Brother
Gomita (afrate godente [see the note to 23.103]) was appointed by Nino Visconti
of Pisa (see 33.13-18, with notes) as his deputy and was later hanged for his
disloyalty and bribe-taking. Nothing is known of the incident related here.
83. his master’s: Dante’s word, donno (used also in line 88), from Latin dominus,
was used in Sardinia as the equivalent of signore.

87. champion: Dante’s word is sovrano [superior, sovereign].

88-89. Michel Zanche of Logodoro: Logodoro was another of the four
Sardinian districts; Michele Zanche is said to have been the deputy of King Enzo

344

Notes to Canto 22

(1239-1249; d. 1272). Again, nothing specific is known of him, beyond his
having been murdered by his son-in-law, Branca Doria, whom Dante places in
Cocytus (33.136—47).

91-93. Oh me... scratch my scurf: Ciampolo’s terror is real and justified,
but he does not lose his presence of mind, as his slangy, contemptuous “scratch
my scurf” indicates. This moment, in which he begins to manipulate the situation to his own advantage, is skillfully chosen, for he has captured everyone’s

attention by telling the truth (cf. 21.106—-14, with notes).
97-99. If you want to see . . Tuscans or Lombards: Virgil has inquired
about Italians generally, but Ciampolo has heard him and the pilgrim converse
and has recognized their respective accents. He assumes—correctly—that they
will be particularly interested in sinners from their own regions (the pilgrim’s
interest in Tuscany needs no comment; Virgil’s interest in Lombardy—compare 1.68—helps account for the digression of 20.58-91). The “question of language” permeates the Malebolge. See Additional Note 13.

106. Evil Dog lifted his snout: He smells the trick, apparently.
112-17.

Harlequin

...

you

can

outdo

us:

See the note

to 21.123;

Harlequin’s delight in pursuit befits the traditional leader of the infernal hunt.
He is “against the others” in wishing to accept Ciampolo’s challenge. The devils’ wings and their ability to fly have not been mentioned since 21.33. They
now become the focus of the action, as Harlequin’s overconfidence and competitiveness lead to the discomfiture of the other devils (grotesquely lacking in
“military” discipline).

118. O you who read . . . sport: The fifth of the seven addresses to the reader
in the Inferno (see the note to 8.94—96). Dante’s word Iudo [sport, or theatrical
play] is a Latinism, derived from the word used by the Romans for athletic contests and gladiatorial fights; novo means both “strange” and “new.”
120. he first ... most unwilling: Evil Dog (lines 106-8).
125. he who had caused the fault: Harlequin (line 112).

131. when the falcon approaches: The imagery of falcons and falconry—
frequently used of angels in the Comedy—first appears in the poem in Canto 3
(see 3.117 and 17.127—32, with notes); it reaches explicitness in this canto just
when the devils’ flight ironically lands them in the pitch: as their actions show,
these are fallen/falling angels.
144. they had so enlimed their wings: Dante’s inviscato [enlimed] is derived
from visco [birdlime], the sticky substance used to capture small birds (inviscare
was part of the system of bird imagery in Canto 13 as well; cf. 13.55-57, with
note); impaniati [viscous ones], line 149, equivalent to inviscati, is derived from

pania, another term for the same substance.
345

Taciti, soli, sanza compagnia

n’andavam I’un dinanzi e l’altro dopo,
come frati minor vanno per via.

Volt’ era in su la favola d’Isopo
lo mio pensier per la presente rissa,
dov’ el parlo de la rana e del topo,

10

13

ché pit non si pareggia mo e issa
che l’un con l’altro fa, se ben s’accoppia
principio e fine con la mente fissa.
E come l'un pensier de l’altro scoppia,
cosi nacque di quello un altro poi,
che la prima paura mi fe doppia.
Io pensava cosi: “Questi per nol
sono scherniti con danno, e con beffa

16

19

si fatta ch’assai credo che lor noi.
Se lira sovra ’] mal voler s’aggueffa,
el ne verranno dietro piu crudeli
che ’] cane a quella lievre ch’elli acceffa.”
Gia mi sentia tutti arricciar li peli
de la paura e stava in dietro intento,

22

De

28

quand’ io dissi: “Maestro, se non celi
te e me tostamente, 1’ ho pavento
d’i Malebranche. Noi li avem gia dietro;
io li ’magino si che gia li sento.”
E quei: “S’i’ fossi di piombato vetro,
Pimagine di fuor tua non trarrei
piu tosto a me che quella dentro ’mpetro.
Pur mo venieno 1 tuo’ pensier tra’ miei,
con simile atto e con simile faccia,

si che d’intrambi un sol consiglio fei.

346

GANTO.2
Imagined pursuit—slide into sixth bolgia: the hypocrites—two Frati
godenti—Caiaphas—the devil lied—Virgil’s anger

Silent, alone, without companions, we were

walking one before, the other after, as friars minor

go their way.
Because of the present scuffle, my thoughts had
turned to that fable by Aesop where he spoke of the
frog and the rat,
for mo and issa are not more alike than the scuffle
and the fable, if one couples beginning and end with
close attention.
And, as one thought bursts out of another, so

16

19

DD,

25

another was born from that one, and it redoubled my
former fear.
I considered: “These through us have suffered
shame with harm, and with mockery that I believe will
bitterly wound them.
If anger is spooled onto their ill will, they will
come after us, crueler than a dog after the hare he
snaps at.”
Already I felt all my hairs curling with fear, and I
kept looking back, when I said: “Master if you do not
hide
yourself and me quickly, I am frightened of the
Evil Claws. They are already behind us; I imagine
them so strongly, I already hear them.”
And he: “If Iwere made ofleaded glass I would
not catch your outer image any faster than I grasp
your inner one.

28

Just now your thoughts came among mine, with
similar bearing and similar face, so that I have made

a single counsel of them.

347

Inferno
y

31

34

oy

40

43

46

49

52

S’elli é che si la destra costa giaccia
che noi possiam ne I’altra bolgia scendere,
noi fuggirem |’imaginata caccia.”
Gia non compie di tal consiglio rendere,
ch’io li vidi venir con l’ali tese
non molto lungi, per volerne prendere.
Lo duca mio di subito mi prese,
come la madre ch’al romore é desta
e vede presso a sé le fiamme accese,
che prende il figlio e fugge e non s’arresta,
avendo piu di lui che di sé cura,
tanto che solo una camiscia vesta:
e giu dal collo de la ripa dura
supin si diede a la pendente roccia
che l'un de’ lati a l’altra bolgia tura.
Non corse mai si tosto acqua per doccia
a volger ruota di molin terragno,
quand’ ella piu verso le pale approccia,
come ’] maestro mio per quel vivagno,
portandosene me sovra ’] suo petto
come suo figlio, non come compagno.
A pena fuoro i pié suoi giunti al letto
del fondo git, ch’ e’ furon in sul colle
sovresso noi; ma non li era sospetto,

55

58

61

64

67

ché l’alta provedenza che lor volle
porre ministri de la fossa quinta,
poder di partirs’ indi a tutti tolle.
La git trovammo una gente dipinta
che giva intorno assai con lenti passi,
piangendo e nel sembiante stanca e vinta.
Elli avean cappe con cappucci bassi
dinanzi a li occhi, fatti de la taglia
che in Clugni per li monaci fassi.
Di fuor dorate son si ch’elli abbaglia,
ma dentro tutte piombo, e gravi tanto
che Federigo le mettea di paglia.
Oh in etterno faticoso manto!
Noi ci volgemmo ancor pur a man manca
con loro insieme, intenti al tristo pianto,
348

Canto 23

31

34

37

40

If the right bank slopes so that we can go down
into the next pocket, we will escape the imagined
pursuit.”
He had not finished giving this advice, when I
saw them coming, with outstretched wings, not far
away, intent on seizing us.
My leader seized me quickly, like a mother who is
awakened by the noise and sees the flames burning
close by,
who takes up her son and flees, caring more for
him than for herself, not stopping even to put on her

shift:
43

and down from the neck of the hard bank, he

46

gave himself supine to the sloping rock that encloses
the near side of the next pocket.
Water has never coursed more swiftly down a
sluice to turn the wheels of a land mill, as it

49

approaches the paddles,
than did my master down that wall, carrying
me along on his breast like his son, not his

52

companion.
Hardly had his feet touched the bed of the ditch,
when the devils appeared on the bank above us; but
now there was nothing to fear,

55

58

61

64

67

for the high Providence that placed them as
ministers of the fifth ditch takes from them all power
to leave it.
Down there we found a painted people who were
walking with very slow steps, weeping and, by their
expressions, weary and defeated.
They were wearing robes with hoods pulled low
over their eyes, made in the fashion that is sewn in
Cluny for the monks.
On the outside they are dazzlingly gilded, but
within they are all of lead, so heavy that the ones
Frederick put on people might have been of straw.
Oh eternally laborious mantle! We turned once
more to the left with them, attentive to their sad

weeping,
349

Infern
¥

70

73

ma per lo peso quella gente stanca
venia si pian che noi eravam nuovi
di compagnia ad ogne mover d’anca.
Per ch’io al duca mio: “Fa che tu trovi
alcun ch’al fatto o al nome si conosca,
e li occhi, si andando, intorno movi.”

76

79

82

E un che ’ntese la parola tosca
di retro a noi grido: “Tenete 1 piedi,
voi che correte si per l’aura fosca!
Forse ch’avrai da me quel che tu chiedi.”
Onde ’] duca si volse, e disse: “Aspetta,
€ poi secondo il suo passo procedi.”
Ristetti, e vidi due mostrar gran fretta
de l’animo, col viso, d’esser meco,

85

88

91

94

97

100

103

106

ma tardavali ’] carco e la via stretta.
Quando fuor giunti, assai con l’occhio bieco
mi rimiraron sanza far parola;
poi si volsero in sé, e dicean seco:
“Costui par vivo a l’atto de la gola;
es’ e’ son morti, per qual privilegio
vanno scoperti de la grave stola?”
Poi disser me: “O Tosco ch’al collegio
de l’ipocriti tristi se’ venuto,
dir chi tu se’ non avere in dispregio.”
E io a loro: “TL fui nato e cresciuto
sovra | bel fiume d’Arno a la gran villa,
e son col corpo ch’)’ ho sempre avuto.
Ma voi chi siete, a cui tanto distilla

quant’ 1’ veggio dolor git per le guance?
e che pena é in voi che si sfavilla?”
E l'un rispuose a me: “Le cappe rance
son di piombo si grosse che li pesi
fan cosi cigolar le lor bilance.
Frati godenti fummo e bolognesi,
io Catalano e questi Loderingo
nomati, e da tua terra insieme presi
come suole esser tolto un uom solingo,
per conservar sua pace; e fummo tali
ch’ancor si pare intorno dal Gardingo.”
350

Canto 23

70

73

76

79

82

85

88

91

94

97

100

103

106

but because of the weight those weary people came
on so slowly that we had a new companion with
each motion of our hips.
Therefore I said to my leader: “Try to find
someone known by deed or name, moving your eyes
about as we walk.”
And one who understood my Tuscan speech,
behind us, called: “Stay your feet, you who are
running so through the dark air!
Perhaps you will have from me what you desire.”
And so my leader turned and said: “Wait, and then
walk at his pace.”
I stood still and saw two showing in their faces
great haste of the spirit to be with me, but their
burden slowed them, and the crowded way.
When they had reached me, for a long time they
looked at me sidelong, without saying a word; then
they turned to each other and spoke together:
“That one seems alive, by the motion of his throat;

but if they are dead, by what privilege are they
exempt from the weighty stole?”
Then they spoke to me: “O Tuscan who have come
to the college of the sad hypocrites, do not disdain to
say who you are.”
And I to them: “I was born and raised beside the
lovely river Arno in the great city, and I am here
with the body I have always had.
But who are you, whose great pain distills all I see
trickling down your cheeks? and what punishment is
in you that sparkles so?”
And one replied: “The orange robes are so thick
with lead that the weights make their balances creak.
We were Jolly Friars, and from Bologna, I
named Catalano and he Loderingo, and taken both
together by your city,
though the custom is to take a single man, to
preserve the peace; and we were such that it still
appears around the Gardingo.”

S)b%|

Inferno

109

Io cominciai: “O frati, i vostri mali...”

ma piu non dissi, ch’a ’occhio mi corse
un crucifisso in terra con tre pali.
112

Quando mi vide, tutto si distorse,

soffiando ne la barba con sospiri;
e ’l frate Catalan, ch’a cio s’accorse,
115

118

mi disse: “Quel confitto che tu mini
consiglio i Farisei che convenia
porre un uom per lo popolo a’ martiri.
Attraversato é nudo ne la via
come tu vedi, ed é mestier ch’el senta,

121

124

27,

qualunque passa, come pesa pria.
E a tal modo il socero si stenta
in questa fossa, e li altri dal concilio
che fu per li Giudei mala sementa.”
Allor vid’ io maravigliar Virgilio
sovra colui ch’era disteso in croce
tanto vilmente ne l’etterno essilio.
Poscia drizzo al frate cotal voce:
“Non vi dispiaccia, se vi lece, dirci

130

133

s’a la man destra giace alcuna foce
onde noi amendue possiamo uscirci,
sanza costrigner de li angeli nen
che vegnan d’esto fondo a dipartirci.”
Rispuose adunque: “Pit che tu non speri
s’appressa un sasso che da la gran cerchia
si move e varca tutt’ i vallon fen,

136

139

142

145

148

salvo che ’n questo é rotto e nol coperchia;
montar potrete su per la ruina,
che giace in costa e nel fondo soperchia.”
Lo duca stette un poco a testa china;
poi disse: “Mal contava la bisogna
colui che i peccator di qua uncina.”
E ’] frate: “Io udi’ gia dire a Bologna
del diavol vizi assai, tra’ quali udi’
ch’elli ¢ bugiardo e padre di menzogna.”

Appresso il duca a gran passi sen gi,
turbato un poco d’ira nel sembiante;
ond’ io da li ’ncarcati mi parti’
dietro a le poste de le care piante.
352

Canto 23

109

112

I began: “O friars, your evil . . .” but I said no more,
for into my view came one crucified to the earth with
three stakes.
When he saw me, he twisted himself all over,

puffing into his beard with sighs; and Brother
Catalano, who perceived it,
iL,

118
121

told me: “That one staked there at whom you are
looking counseled the Pharisees that it was
expedient to put one man to death for the people.
He is stretched naked out across the road, as you
see, so that whoever passes, he must feel his weight first.
And his father-in-law is laid out in the same way
in this ditch, and the others of the council that sowed

139

so ill for the Jews.”
Then I saw Virgil marveling over him who was
so basely stretched cross-wise in the eternal exile.
Then he directed to the friar this word: “Let it not
displease you, if it is permitted, to tell us if on the
right hand some passage slopes
whereby we can both climb out of here, without
requiring any of the black angels to come to this
bottom to transport us.”
So he replied: “Closer than you hope, we are
approaching a ridge that goes from the largest circle
across all the savage valleys,
except that in this one it is broken and does not
cover it; you will be able to climb up along the
landslide, which slopes gently up the side and is
heaped up at the bottom.”
My leader stood a little with head bent down;

142

hooks the sinners on this side.”
And the friar: “In Bologna I once heard many

124
127

130

133

136

then he said: “Ill did he recount the business, who

vices of the devil told, among which I heard that he
145

is a liar and the father oflies.”
Then my leader walked off with great strides, his
face a little disturbed with anger; so I left the

burdened ones,
148

following the prints of his dear feet.

IDS

NOTES

1-3. Silent, alone . . . go their way: Franciscan friars went on their begging
rounds in pairs, the younger following in the steps of the elder with lowered
eyes. The commentators point out that the image anticipates the conventual
imagery important later in the canto. The shift in tone from the ending of the
last canto is striking.
4-33. Because of the present scuffle . . . the imagined pursuit: The pilgrim reacts to images in his memory, both of the scuffle and of Aesop’s fables
(popular in many reworkings and translations, and often used as elementary Latin
textbooks); his thought is associative and combinatory, and it bears fruit in further images and even physical sensations (lines 19, 23-24). And it soon turns
out that the pilgrim’s imaginings are correct. On the other hand, Virgil’s
responses seem slow and ponderous, though he does act with dispatch in lines
37-45.
In emphasizing the pilgrim’s vivid imaginings, Dante is drawing on the medieval idea of the imagination: the imaging faculty, which we share with the beasts,
with its physical organ (the anterior ventricle of the brain), by which we are able
to construct, associate, analyze, and combine images derived from the data of

the senses, closely associated with the memory (in the rear ventricle) and with
foresight. The entire passage is in fact a kind of test case for the usefulness of the
body. Virgil’s strangely disembodied responses here probably derive from this
conception (he is close to personifying “disembodied” reason: cf. the mirror image
in line 25).

4-6. that fable by Aesop: Among the dozens of versions of “Aesop” circulating in the Middle Ages (most of them going back to the Roman author
Phaedrus), Dante seems to have used those deriving from the Romulus in Latin

verse by Walter of England, of which there are a number of Old French adaptations and expansions. In the most widely circulated, a frog offers to swim a
mouse across a body of water, intending to drown him; the frog ties his leg to
the mouse’s; when the frog tries to drown the mouse, their struggles attract a
hawk, who seizes them; the frog’s leg being tied to the mouse makes escape

impossible for both of them. The “morality” of the fable emphasizes that the
devices of the fraudulent return upon them: in the Old French Ysopet (Paris, I,

in McKenzie and Oldfather), “barat doit conchier son mestre” [a swindle must
cover its maker with shit]. Both Walter’s Latin and the French versions emphasize the idea of the snare (Jas). In Marie de France’s version, also based on
the Romulus, the hawk eats the frog but lets the mouse go as too small (curi-

354

Notes to Canto 23

ously, in her version the frog tempts the mouse out from her home in a land
mill; see line 47).

7-9. for mo and issa . . . close attention: That is, the beginning and end of
the scuffle are like those of the fable (mo and issa both mean “now” or “soon”;
issa/istra is identified in 27.20—21 as Lombard; the two words are instances of

identical content in different form or different dress—[see Additional Note 13)).
The parallels Dante intends are not too clear, and the commentators have not

reached agreement on them. In our view, the pilgrim and Virgil seem parallel to
the mouse in seeking help from the devils, who would be parallel to the frog
with its evil intentions; thus Ciampolo would be an inverted parallel to the hawk.
Many other possibilities have been suggested.
16. If anger . . ill will: That is, if anger is now added to the devils’ permanent disposition of ill will.
25-27. If I were made of leaded glass . . . your inner one: Mirrors were
made by coating one side of a sheet of glass with lead. Virgil is saying, “If I were
a mirror, I would not catch the image of your body (your outer image) faster
than I see your imagining or your thought (your inner image).” Virgil is close to
a personification of human reason here, which operates in conjunction with the
(bodily) imaging faculty.
28-30. Just now your thoughts . . . a single counsel: A striking personification of the pilgrim’s and Virgil’s thoughts. Virgil claims that his thoughts are
just as anguished as the pilgrim’s (whose “bearing and face” must be terrorstricken), but it is hard to believe him. “I have made a single counsel of them”
means “I have reached a decision on their basis.”
31-32. If the right bank slopes . . . the next pocket: As 19.35 has already
made clear, the outer bank of a bolgia (i.e., the one farthest from the center) has
a steeper slope than the inner one. Note that Virgil’s words also serve an expository function.
40-42. not stopping even to put on her shift: That is, she is naked; her
concern for her child causes her to disregard appearances entirely; the line has
also been interpreted to mean the mother wears “only a shift.”

44-45. he gave himself supine . . .the next pocket: That is, Virgil, holding
Dante to his breast, slides down the bank into the next bolgia; he is “supine”
because the bank is so steep that he cannot sit up as he slides, but must lie

back.

B59

Inferno

46—48. Water has never coursed . . . the paddles: Dante has in mind the
type of mill to which stream or river water is diverted through a system of sloping canals and sluices; as the early commentator Buti observed, this type usually
has wheels smaller than those of the type set in the river itself, and therefore
requires high velocity in the water. For the question of the relation of these cantos
to events in Dante’s life, see Additional Note 9.
‘

55-57. the high Providence ... power to leave it: The pilgrim at least
may be presumed not to have known of this limitation in advance, partly because
of the devil of 21.29-45.
58. a painted people: The expression is probably explained in line 64 (some
early commentators took the expression to mean the hypocrites’ faces were
painted to simulate ascetic pallor). For the connection of painting and colors with
fraud, see the description of Geryon, especially 17.16—18.
60. by their expressions: A reminder that the facial expressions of the hypocrites were not, in life, a reliable index of their feelings.

61-63. They were wearing robes. . . for the monks: The abbey of Cluny
in Burgundy, founded in 910, was originally the chief expression of a major
reform movement in Benedictine monasticism, introducing a system of central-

ized administration in which daughter houses, called priories, were subject to
Cluny. By the time of Saint Bernard of Clairvaux (leader of another and more
austere reform movement, that of the Cistercians, in the early twelfth century),

Cluny was extremely powerful, with the largest church in Europe, famous for
its wealth, luxury, proliferation of artistic ornament, and elaborate liturgy. Saint

Bernard vehemently criticized the luxurious woolen and fur habits worn by its
monks.
64-65. On the outside ... all of lead: Hypokrites, the Greek etymon of
hypocrite, derived from the verb “to judge,” meant, variously, “one who gives
an answer”; an “interpreter”; an “actor” (in plays and recitations); and thus a
“simulator.” Dante, however, is following the etymology given by the famous
thirteenth-century handbook of (often fanciful) etymologies, Uguccione of Pisa’s
Magnae derivationes: “‘hypocrita derives from hyper, above, and crisis, gold, as it were
gilt over, for on the surface and externally he appears good, but within he is evil;
or hypocrita is derived from hypo, below, and crisis, gold, as it were having something else beneath the gold” (quoted by Sapegno; cf. Toynbee 1897). Dante is also
drawing on the denunciations of hypocrisy in the Gospels (Matt. 6.1—6, 16-18;
7.4—5, 15; 15.1-9; and Chapter 23 in its entirety, as well as passages in the other
Gospels).

356

Notes to Canto 23

65-66. so heavy .. . of straw: According to the Guelf propaganda campaign
against the emperor Frederick II (see the notes to 10.119, 13.58-61), he punished traitors by encasing them in lead and then roasting them (cf. Phalaris’s bull,
27.7-15).
67. Oh eternally laborious mantle: The contrapasso is clear: the continual
alertness required for the hypocrite to conceal his true feelings (usually said to
be vainglory and avarice) is symbolized by the weight of the cloak. Dante is following a tradition, which has a certain basis in the Gospels (see the note to lines
89-90), personifying hypocrisy in terms of the monastic or religious orders. In
the Romance of the Rose, a particularly influential text, Faux-Semblant [False-Seeming] is represented as a Franciscan friar (cf. 23.1—3, with note). Note also the use
of the term manto for the papal mantle (19.69).
70-72. because of the weight . . . motion of our hips: This is also a commentary on the difficulty hypocrites have, caught up as they are in their pretenses, in achieving repentance or actual spiritual progress.

72. with each motion of our hips: At each step.
76. my Tuscan speech: Again the emphasis on the pilgrim’s regional speech
(also in line 91).

82-83. two showing in their faces . . . to be with me: This is a brilliantly
two-edged detail: on the assumption that these two hypocrites are “sincere” in
their desire to reach the pilgrim, the irony of the contrapasso condemns them to
great difficulty; but the lines also suggest that—in keeping with their fundamental
sin—even this appearance may be misleading.
84. the crowded way: The Italian stretta may mean “narrow” here (cf. Matt.
7.13-14, on the “narrow way” that leads to salvation).
85. sidelong: Literally, “with oblique eye” (con l’occhio bieco), the traditional
crooked glance of the envious (see 6.91, with note). Aquinas’s Catena aurea on
Matt.7.5 (“Thou hypocrite, cast out first the beam from thine own eye, and then

shalt thou see to cast out the [straw] from thy brother’s eye”) quotes Augustine:
“Removing from our own eye the beam of envy or malice or dissembling, then
we can see to cast out the straw from our brother’s eye.”
89-90. by what privilege . . . from the weighty stole: The hypocrites are
using legal language: “privilege” is technically a right (a law, lex) specific (or

Boi

Inferno

private) to a single person or restricted group. The “heavy stole” is of course
their leaden garment. The term stole is used in a number of New Testament
passages: in the Gospel denunciations of hypocrites (Mark and Luke), it refers to
luxurious garments: “Beware of the scribes, who desire to walk in [stoles] and
love salutations in the market place ...

; who devour the houses of widows,

feigning long prayer. These will receive a greater damnation” (Luke 20.46—47).
In the Apocalypse (e.g., 6.11, 7.9), the white stole is the garb of the redeemed
(see Purg. 32.81 and Par. 25.95, 30.129, with notes).

91. O Tuscan: The soul has recognized the pilgrim’s speech as Tuscan; his
apostrophe recalls Farinata’s in 10.22.
91. the college of the sad hypocrites: Italian collegio (Latin collegium, a binding together) was used of many kinds of organization and usually implied a set
of rules; here the hypocrite is comparing the bolgia of the hypocrites to a convent. The Sanhedrin (referred to in lines 122—23) could also be called a collegio;
in Par. 19.110—11, Dante calls the blessed and the damned “the two colleges.”
“The sad hypocrites” is a quotation from the Sermon on the Mount (Matt. 6.16):
“When you fast, be not like the sad hypocrites” (hypocritae tristes).
94-96. I was born . . . I have always had: The pilgrim’s reply does not tell
the hypocrites anything they have not already inferred or could infer (see line
88, and the first note to line 91).

95. the great city: In 1300 Florence was one of the two or three largest cities
in Europe. Dante’s term for “city” here is villa (cf. 1.109).
97-99. But who are you . . . sparkles so: Since lines 64-67 would seem to
mean that the pilgrim has already understood the nature of the punishment in
this bolgia; he is now being extremely disingenuous (and scornful—“sparkles” of
course refers to the bright gold exterior of their robes).

100-102. The orange robes ... make their balances creak: Catalano is
comparing the structure of the human body, with the spine crossed by the shoulders and arms, to that of a traditional balance or scale; it would seem the weight

causes the very bones to grind against each other. There is a rich tradition attached to this analogy, connecting the Scales ofJustice (seen in the constellation
Libra, associated with the virgin goddess of justice, Astraea, who returned to the
sky to become the constellation Virgo, in the Middle Ages often identified with
the Virgin Mary) and the figure of Christ on the Cross (satisfying God’s justice;
cf. lines 15-16 of Venantius Fortunatus’s hymn “Vexilla regis,” which is dis-

cussed in the note to 34.1—2). Thus, like the punishment of the members of the

358

Notes to Canto 23

Sanhedrin (lines 115-23), there is a clear indication that the punishment of the

hypocrites is a distorted parody of the Crucifixion, punishing their corruption
of justice (see the note to lines 105-8).

103. We were Jolly Friars: Frati godenti was the scornful popular nickname
for the Cavalieri della Milizia della Beata Maria Vergine Gloriosa, a religious
order founded in 1260 for the purpose of promoting civil peace; the brothers
were prohibited from accepting governmental positions (but see the note to lines
105-8). The nickname reflects the fact that the order quickly achieved a reputation for corruption and self-interest.
104. I named

Catalano

and he Loderingo:

Catalano dei Malavolti

was a Guelf; Loderingo degli Andald, one of the founders of the order, was a
Ghibelline.

105-8. taken both together ... around the Gardingo: Medieval Italian
cities often appointed citizens of other cities to such posts as podesta (see the note
to 6.96), usually singly. In 1266, in an effort to mediate the enmity between the
Guelfs and the Ghibellines, Florence appointed these two jointly. Dante clearly
feels that they hypocritically pretended impartiality but secretly fomented the
anti-Ghibelline violence that erupted in 1267, leading to the banishment of
prominent Ghibelline families and the confiscation of their property, and, in the
case of the Uberti and several others, the destruction of their houses: the Uberti

houses were near the Gardingo (the term means “watchtower’”); the space they
occupied until 1267 is now the Piazza della Signoria. Modern scholarship holds
that Catalano’s and Loderingo’s activities were explicitly directed by the pope,
Clement IV.

109. I began: “‘O friars, your evil: This ambiguous beginning (mali [evils] is
plural; it could be either a noun or an adjective) is like that of the pilgrim’s replies to Francesca (5.116) and to Ciacco (6.58); presumably the continuation
would have been scornfully ironic. The interruption reflects the pilgrim’s amazement at the sight now described (for Virgil’s amazement, see line 124).
111. with three stakes: That is, one through each hand and one through both
feet, as Jesus was represented as having been crucified (though with nails, not
stakes).
115-23.

That one staked there . . . so ill for the Jews: It is Caiaphas, the

high priest and head of the Sanhedrin (the supreme council of Jerusalem), who
urged the crucifixion of Jesus with the words, “It is expedient that one man die
for the people” (John 11.45—52, 18.14). Dante follows the traditional interpre-

oo

Inferno

tation, which held that Caiaphas and the others voted to condemn Jesus in order
to silence his criticisms of their hypocrisy, covering their self-interest with a pretense of public concern (Caiaphas’s words unwittingly alluded to the Atonement).
118-20. He is stretched . . . feel his weight first: Thus the hypocrites who
voted to kill Jesus must feel the weight of the hypocrisy of all the others. This is
a parodic parallel to the traditional idea that Christ'on the Cross bore the weight
of all men’s sins (the parodic nature of the general punishment here is discussed
in the note to lines 100-102). Is. 51.23 (on the humiliation ofJerusalem), “and
you have placed your body as it were as a road for passers-by,” is possibly being

echoed here.
121. his father-in-law: Annas, Caiaphas’s father-in-law, also a member of the
Sanhedrin.

122. council that sowed so ill for the Jews: Like other medieval Christians, Dante considered the siege and destruction of Jerusalem by the Romans
under Titus (A.D. 70), as well as the later diaspora, to be the divinely ordained

punishment of the Jews for the killing of Jesus (the Gospels represent them as
accepting the guilt on their heads and those of their children; e.g., Matt. 27.25).
The matter is discussed at some length in Paradiso 7.
124-26. Then I saw Virgil . . . in the eternal exile: The miraculous aspects
of the Incarnation and Atonement are apparently unknown and incomprehensible to Virgil, who is denied the Chnistian revelation. But the pilgrim is also
amazed; see also Jer. 49.17 (on the destruction of Edom): “Every one that shall
pass by it, shall be astonished and will whistle over all her wounds.”
128-32. Let it not displease you ... to transport us: Note the parallel
with the ceremonious pseudocourtesy of the hypocrites in line 93. “On the right
hand” is specified because their turn to the left placed the center of Hell to their
right.

139-41. My leader stood . . . on this side: Virgil bends his head in thought
(compare the pilgrim’s bowed head in 5.109—11) as he comes to understand
Evil Tail’s deception (21.111). Since the beginning of the canto, he and the
pilgrim have walked at a normal pace (1-33); slid to the bottom of this bolgia
(34-51); resumed a normal pace (68-72); stood still to await the two hypocrites (81-82); and walked at the pace of the hypocrites (81). They again stand
still as Virgil meditates here. Now, with an angry energy that provides wel-

come release from the accumulated sense of constraint, they walk rapidly toward the fallen bridge.

360

Notes to Canto 23

144. a liar and the father of lies: The hypocrite is quoting Christ’s words in
John 8.44: “for he [the devil] is a liar, and the father thereof [i.e., of lies]”; the
phrase had become proverbial.
148. following the prints of his dear feet: A line that beautifully crystallizes the affection that underlies all the humor at Virgil’s expense in this and the
two previous cantos.

361

CANTO

24

In quella parte del giovanetto anno
che ’] sole i crin sotto l’Aquario tempra
e gia le notti al mezzo di sen vanno,
quando la brina in su la terra assempra
limagine di sua sorella bianca,
ma poco dura a la sua penna tempra,
lo villanello a cui la roba manca
si leva e guarda, e vede la campagna
biancheggiar tutta; ond’ ei si batte l’anca,
10

13

19

22

25

ritorna in casa, e qua e 1a si lagna,

come ’] tapin che non sa che si faccia;
poi riede, e la speranza ringavagna,
veggendo ’] mondo aver cangiata faccia
in poco d’ora; e prende suo vincastro
e fuor le pecorelle a pascer caccia:
cosi mi fece sbigottir lo mastro
quand’ io li vidi si turbar la fronte,
e cosi tosto al mal giunse lo ’mpiastro;
ché, come noi venimmo al guasto ponte,
lo duca a me si volse con quel piglio
dolce ch’io vidi prima a pié del monte.
Le braccia aperse, dopo alcun consiglio
eletto seco riguardando prima
ben la ruina, e diedemi di piglio.
E come quei ch’adopera ed estima,
che sempre par che ’nnanzi si proveggia,
cosi, levando me su ver’ la cima

28

d’un ronchione, avvisava un’altra scheggia
dicendo: “Sovra quella poi t’aggrappa;
ma tenta pria s’é tal ch’ella ti reggia.”

362

GAN ©, 24
Climb out of sixth bolgia—seventh bolgia: thieves—metamorphosis—
Vanni Fucci

In that part of the youthful year when the sun
tempers its locks under Aquarius and already the
nights are moving south,
when on the ground the frost copies the image of
her white sister, but her pen retains its temper only
briefly,

the peasant, his provisions running short, rises to
look, and sees the fields all white; and he strikes his
10

thigh,
goes back in his house, and complains here and
there, like a wretch who knows not what to do; then

iS

he goes forth again and stores hope in his wicker basket
again,
seeing the face of the world has changed in a
short time; and he takes his crook and drives the

16

19

22

25

28

little sheep forth to pasture:
sO my master made me lose confidence, when |
saw his brow so clouded, and just as quickly he
applied the plaster to the wound;
for, when we came to the ruined bridge, my

leader turned to me with the sweet expression I first
saw at the foot of the mountain.
After first having taken counsel with himself by
examining the ruin carefully, he opened his arms
and took hold of me.
And like one who uses judgment as he acts,
always seeming to look ahead, so, carrying me up to
the top
of one rock, he would look to another great
splinter, saying: “Pull yourself up to that one next,
but first test whether it will hold your weight.”

363°

Inferno
‘

Sil

Non era via da vestito di cappa,
ché noi a pena, ei lieve e io sospinto,

34

potavam su montar di chiappa in chiappa.
E se non fosse che da quel precinto
piu che da l’altro era la costa corta,
non so di lui, ma io sarei ben vinto;

37

40

43

46

ma, perché Malebolge inver’ la porta
del bassissimo pozzo tutta pende,
lo sito di ciascuna valle porta
che l’una costa surge e l’altra scende.
Noi pur venimmo al fine in su la punta
onde l’ultima pietra si scoscende.
La lena m’era del polmon si munta
quand’ io fui su, ch’i’ non potea piu oltre,
anzi m’assisi ne la prima giunta.
“Omai convien che tu cosi ti spoltre,”
disse ’] maestro, “ché seggendo in piuma
in fama non si vien, né sotto coltre;

49

52

55

58

sanza la qual chi sua vita consuma,
cotal vestigio in terra di sé lascia
qual fummo in aere e in acqua la schiuma.
E pero leva su; vinci l’ambascia
con l’animo che vince ogne battaglia,
se col suo grave corpo non s’accascia.
Piu lunga scala convien che si saglia;
non basta da costoro esser partito.
Se tu mi ’ntendi, or fa si che ti vaglia.”
Leva’mi allor, mostrandomi fornito

meglio di lena ch’i’ non mi sentia,
e dissi: “Va, ch’i’ son forte e ardito.”
61

Su per lo scoglio prendemmo la via,
ch’era ronchioso, stretto e malagevole,

ed erto pit assai che quel di pria.
64

Parlando andava per non parer fievole;
onde una voce usci de I’altro fosso,

a parole formar disconvenevole.
67

Non so che disse, ancor che sovra ’] dosso

fossi de l’arco gia che varca quivi,
ma chi parlava ad ire parea mosso.
364

Canto 24

31

34

It was not a path for anyone wearing a cloak,
since only with difficulty, though he was light and |
was pushed from below, were we able to climb from
outcrop to outcrop.
And were it not that there the wall was shorter
than on the other side, I do not know about him, but

37

40

43

46

I would have been quite overcome;
but because all Malebolge slopes toward the
opening of the lowest pit, the nature of each valley
requires
that one wall be steep, the other low. Finally we
reached the point where the last rock had broken off.
My breath was so milked from my lungs when I
arrived there that I could go no further, but rather
sat down as soon as we arrived.
“From now on you will have to cast off sloth in
this way,” said my master, “for one does not gain
fame sitting on down cushions, or while under coverlets;

49

52

aS)

58

and whoever consumes his life without fame
leaves a mark of himself on earth like smoke in the air or
foam in water.
And therefore stand up; conquer your panting
with the spirit that conquers in every battle, if it does
not let the heavy body crush it down.
A longer ladder must we climb; it is not enough
to have left those others behind. If you understand
me, now act so that it may help you.”
I stood up then, pretending to be better furnished
with breath than I felt, and said: “Go, for I am strong

61

64

and bold.”
Up along the ridge we took our way, which was
jagged, narrow, and difficult, and much steeper than
the last.
I was speaking as I went, so as not to seem feeble;

and then a voice came from the next ditch, unapt to
form words.
67

I do not know what it said, although I was

already mounting the arch that crosses there, but the
speaker seemed to be moved to anger.
365

Inferno
Sy

70

We

Io era volto in git, ma li occhi vivi
non poteano ire al fondo per lo scuro;
per ch’io: “Maestro, fa che tu arrivi
da l’altro cinghio, e dismontiam lo muro;
ché, com’ i’ odo quinci e non intendo,

cosi git! veggio e neente affiguro.”
76

“Altra risposta,” disse, “non'ti rendo
se non lo far; ché la dimanda onesta

Ww

82

si de’ seguir con l’opera tacendo.”
Noi discendemmo il ponte da la testa
dove s’aggiugne con l’ottava ripa,
e poi mi fu la bolgia manifesta;
e vidivi entro terribile stipa
di serpenti, e di si diversa mena
che la memoria il sangue ancor mi scipa.

85

Pid non si vanti Libia con sua rena;

ché se chelidri, iaculi e faree
produce, e cencri con anfisibena,
88

91

né tante pestilenzie né si ree
mostro gia mai con tutta l’Etiopia
né con cio che di sopra al Mar Rosso ée.
Tra questa cruda e tristissima copia

corréan genti nude e spaventate,
sanza sperar pertugio o elitropia:
94

97

100

con serpi le man dietro avean legate;
quelle ficcavan per le ren la coda
e ’l capo, ed eran dinanzi aggroppate.
Ed ecco a un ch’era da nostra proda
s’avvento un serpente che ’ trafisse
la dove ’] collo a le spalle s’annoda.
Né O si tosto mai né IJsi scrisse
com’ el s’accese e arse, e cener tutto
convenne che cascando divenisse;

103

106

e poi che fu a terra si distrutto,
la polver si raccolse per sé stessa
e ’n quel medesmo ritorno di butto.
Cosi per li gran savi si confessa
che la fenice more e poi rinasce,
quando al cinquecentesimo anno appressa;
366

Canto 24

70

I was looking downward, but my sharp eyes
could not attain the bottom, because of the dark; and

73

I: “Master, when you reach
the next belt, let us descend from the ridge; for as
from here I hear but cannot understand, so I look

76

72,

down but make nothing out.”
“No other reply,” he said, “do I give than action;
for a virtuous request should be obeyed without
discussion.”
We came down from the bridgehead where it joins
the eighth bank, and then the pouch was made
manifest to me;

82

85

88

91

94

97

100

and I saw within it a terrible crowding of
serpents, and of such a strange kind that the memory
still curdles my blood.
Let Libya brag of its sands no more; for if it
produces chelydri, jaculi, and phareae, and chenchres
with amphisbaenae,
never did it show so many pestilences nor so
poisonous, together with all Ethiopia and what lies
beyond the Red Sea.
Amid this harsh and savage plenty were running
naked, terrified people, without hope of a crevice or
a heliotrope:
their hands were bound behind them with snakes;

these thrust through the loins their tails and
heads and were knotted in front.
And behold, a serpent hurled itself at one near
our bank and transfixed him where the neck is
knotted to the shoulders.
Neither O nor I has ever been written so fast as he
caught fire and burned and was all consumed,
falling, to ashes;

103

and when he was on the ground, destroyed, the

dust gathered together by itself and instantly became
the same one again.
Thus the great sages profess that the Phoenix dies
and is reborn, when it approaches its five hundredth
year;
367

Inferno

109

erba né biado in sua vita non pasce,
ma sol d’incenso lagrime e d’amomo,

112

115

118

121

124

e nardo e mirra son l’ultime fasce.
E qual é quel che cade, e non sa como,
per forza di demon ch’a terra il tira,
o d’altra oppilazion che lega l’omo,
quando si leva, che ’ntorno si mira
tutto smarrito de la grande angoscia
ch’elli ha sofferta, e guardando sospira:
tal era ’l peccator levato poscia.
Oh potenza di Dio, quant’ é severa,
che cotai colpi per vendetta croscia!
Lo duca il domando poi chi ello era;
per ch’ei rispuose: “Io piovvi di Toscana,
poco tempo é, in questa gola fiera.
Vita bestial mi piacque e non umana,
si come a mul ch’i’ fui; son Vanni Fucci

bestia, e Pistoia mi fu degna tana.”
127

E io al duca: “Dilli che non mucci,

e domanda che colpa qua git ’| pinse;
ch’io ’] vidi omo di sangue e di crucci.”
130

E ’| peccator, che ’ntese, non s’infinse,
ma drizz6 verso me |’animo e ’! volto,

133

136

159

142

145

e di trista vergogna si dipinse;
poi disse: “Pit mi duol che tu m’hai colto
ne la miseria dove tu mi vedi
che quando fui de l’altra vita tolto.
Io non posso negar quel che tu chiedi:
in git son messo tanto perch’ io fui
ladro a la sagrestia d’1 belli arredi,
e falsamente gia fu apposto altrui.
Ma perché di tal vista tu non godi,
se mai sarai di fuor da’ luoghi bui,
apri li orecchi al mio annunzio, e odi.
Pistoia in pria d’i Neri si dimagra;
poi Fiorenza rinova gente e modi.
Tragge Marte vapor di Val di Magra
ch’é di torbidi nuvoli involuto,

e con tempesta impetiiosa e agra
368

Canto 24

109

112

in its life it eats neither grass nor grain but only
tears of incense and of balsam, and nard and myrrh
are its winding sheet.
And like one who falls, he knows not how, by the

force of a demon that pulls him to the earth or of
some other occlusion that can bind a man,
115

118

121

124

when he stands up he gazes about all dismayed
by the great anguish he has suffered, and sighs as he
looks:
such was the sinner when he stood up. Oh the
power of God, how severe it is, what torrents of
punishment it pours forth!
My leader then asked him who he was; and he
replied: “I rained down from Tuscany, not long ago,
into this fierce throat.
Bestial life pleased me, not human, mule that I
was; I am Vanni Fucci the beast, and Pistoia was a

127

worthy lair for me.”
And I to my leader: “Tell him not to sneak off,
and ask him what sin drove him down here; for I

saw him a bloody, wrathful man.”
130

And the sinner, who heard, did not feign, but

turned to me his mind and his face and was covered
with sad shame;
133

136

159

then he said: “It pains me more to be caught in the
wretchedness where you see me than when I was
taken from the other life.
I cannot refuse what you ask: I am placed so far
down because I stole the beautiful appointments
from the sacristy,
and it was falsely blamed on others. But lest you
joy in seeing me, if you ever get out of these dark
places,

142

open your ears to my message, and listen. Pistoia
first thins itself of Blacks; then Florence makes new

145

its laws and people.
Mars draws from Val di Magra a hot wind
wrapped in roiling clouds, and with impetuous, bitter
violence
369

Inferno

148

151

sovra Campo Picen fia combattuto;
ond’ ei repente spezzera la nebbia
si ch’ogne Bianco ne sara feruto.
E detto l’ho perché doler ti debbia!”

370

Canto 24

148

151

they will fight above Campo Piceno; and he will
suddenly break the cloud, so that every White will be
stricken by it.
And I have told you this that it may grieve you!”

Ne

371

NOTES

1-21. In that part ... of the mountain: With the opening of Canto 30,
this is the most elaborate of the similes beginning cantos of the Malebolge
(cf. Cantos 18, 21, 22, and 28). There is careful layering of levels of the cosmos:

first the constellations (lines 1-3); then the earth (lines 4-6) subject to weather
(lines 9-12); and finally the human figure is introduced in terms that emphasize
its mutable passions (lines 10-15). Finally the foci of the simile emerge: the change
of Virgil’s expression (lines 17-18), compared to the melting frost, and the
pilgrim’s response (lines 18—21), compared to the peasant’s initial dismay and
later hope. Changes in the “face of the world” (line 13) parallel those in the faces
of Virgil and the pilgrim.
The commentators have observed that the simile broaches metamorphosis,
the dominant theme of the next bolgia, reached in line 70. Medieval commentators on Ovid’s Metamorphoses, on whom Dante draws heavily in the next cantos, note that the initial events of that poem (the creation of the world, of man,

of the giants, etc.) and the changes observed in the world (the seasons, the birth
and death of living things) are all instances of metamorphosis, broadly understood as the changes that occur in creatures over time.
2-3. the sun tempers its locks ... are moving south: See Aen. 9.638:
“crinitus Apollo” [long-haired Apollo] and Georgics 3.303—4: “cum frigidus olim/
iam cadit extremoque inrorat Aquarius anno” [when once-cold Aquarius is
already setting and bedews the last of the year]. The sun is cooling (perhaps
strengthening, as steel is tempered in cold water after forging) its rays in the cold
waters of Aquarius, therefore the imagined date is between January 21 and February 21, if conventional dates are used. The nights (thought of as the ideal point
opposite the sun; cf. 34.5, with note) turn south at the winter solstice, when the

sun turns north along the ecliptic (the Italian al mezzo di sen vanno can also mean
they “diminish to a half day,” but with less exactitude, since only at the vernal

equinox have they diminished so far).
4—6. the frost . . . only briefly: The simile is drawn from writing: the hoarfrost is like an inscription on the surface of the ground, copied from that of the
snow, but it fades as the day warms up, just as real writing loses definition when
the pen (for Dante a goose quill or a sharpened reed) loses its sharpness, or “temper” (the same word as in line 2). Dante’s assemprare refers to copying into manuscripts (see Vita nuova 1). For parallel images see Lucan, Pharsalia 4.52-53, and
Ex. 16.14-21. For other similes derived from writing, see line 100 and 25.64—
66, and see the reference to the poet’s pen at 25.143—44.

BOYZ,

Notes to Canto 24

12. stores hope in his wicker basket: The import of the simile is hopeful;
see also lines 20—21. By escaping from the Evil Claws the pair have overcome a
serious danger (linked to the autobiographical content of the episode; see Additional Note 9). The phrase recalls Virgil’s earlier description of trust as something “put in one’s purse” (11.54).

13. the face of the world has changed: See Psalm 103.30: “Thou shall send
forth thy spirit, and they shall be created: and thou shall renew the face of the
earth.” See also lines 104—5 and 144, and 25.143, with notes.

15. drives the little sheep forth: The scene has put commentators in mind
of the Bucolics and Georgics of Vergil (see the note to lines 2—4); Vergil was himself thought of as a “shepherd.” But the figure of “pastoral” care is also of course
Christian: the shepherd of Psalm 23 [Vulgate 22] was understood to be Christ
(cf. John 21.17: “feed my sheep,” and the note to 19.132).
21. at the foot of the mountain: Recalling Virgil’s original rescue of the
pilgrim (1.63) emphasizes the hopeful tone. At lines 25-45 the wayfarers climb,
rather than descend, perhaps foreshadowing the climb up the “mountain of
virtue,” that of Purgatory (see line 55); for the same reason, perhaps, moral

commonplaces encouraging perseverance are frequent in the canto.
22-27. After first having taken counsel . . . up to the top: Virgil exhibits
prudence, discretion, and fortitude, as if demonstrating the so-called cardinal virtues (prudence, justice, fortitude, and temperance).
24. took hold of me: Virgil will carry the pilgrim out of the sixth bolgia, that
of the hypocrites, as he carried him into it when the wayfarers escaped from the
Evil Claws (23.37—51) and as he did in the other case of descent into a bolgia (see
19.34—35).
31. a cloak:
Canto 23.

An

ironic

reference

to the hypocrites’

leaden

cloaks

in

46-57. From now on... that it may help you: Virgil’s exhortation is based
on the commonplace of the choice of Hercules at the crossroads: between the
steep mountain of virtue, or the wide, inviting plain of vice; there is also an explicit
reference to the climb up the mountain of Purgatory (“‘a longer ladder’’) where
the notion of a mountain of virtue will be brought in more forcefully. For Hercules, see 9.98 and 25.32, with notes.

49-51.

whoever consumes

his life . . . foam in water: See Aen. 5.740,

of Anchises’ ghost: “tenuis fugit ceu fumus in auras” [he fled like thin smoke

oye

Inferno

into the air]. But the moralizing tone of Virgil’s images is biblical: see, for
example, Wisdom 5.15: “For the hope of the wicked is . . . as a thin froth
which is dispersed by the storm: and a smoke that is scattered abroad by the
wind” (cf. Psalm 36.20). For additional images of smoke, see 25.22, 92-93,
and 135, with notes.

53. the spirit ... the heavy body: See Aen. 6.730-34 (quoted in the note
to 10.58) and Wisdom 9.15: “For the corruptible body is a load upon the soul,
and the earthly habitation presseth down the mind. . . .” Although the ideas are
commonplace, Dante’s mention of the relation of spirit and body, just before
entering the bolgia of metamorphosis, is significant.
55. A longer ladder: The climb from the bottom of Hell to the surface of the
earth (34.127-39); or the climb to the top of Purgatory; or both (cf. 34.82).
64-66. I was speaking ... unapt to form words: The first information
about the seventh bolgia, like the last (see 25.136—42, with notes), relates to speech.

69. moved to anger: The Italian can also mean “in motion”; we think the
ambiguity is probably intentional, but there is an interesting textual problem here:
see “Textual Variants.”
82. a terrible crowding of serpents: The appropriateness of the snakes to
the punishment of thieves of course derives from the account of the serpent’s
temptation of Adam and Eve in Gen. 3.1—7. The archetypal thief is the devil,
who stealthily entered the Garden and the serpent in order to steal mankind
from God (cf. Augustine, De Genesi ad litteram 28-29); Adam’s sin included all
others (murder because it caused his and Eve’s deaths, theft because the fruit

was forbidden, and so forth). In the Confessions, Augustine devotes most of
Book 2 to explicating his adolescent theft of pears from a neighbor’s orchard
as a type of Adam’s sin and of sin in general. In Jesus’ parable of the sheepfold
(John 10.1-18), the thief is regularly identified as the devil. See Additional
Note 10.
84. the memory still curdles my blood: The early commentators understand Dante’s term here (scipa) in various ways, taking it to mean either “divide,
curdle” or “spoil.”

85-90. Let Libya brag . . . the Red Sea: In the Middle Ages, Libya, Ethiopia, and Arabia (to the west, southeast, and east of Egypt, respectively) were
considered inhospitable to human life because of the heat of the torrid zone (for

374

Notes to Canto 24

the fabulous origin of the desert, see 17.106-11, with note). In Aristotle’s works
on natural science and in Pliny’s Natural History, these areas are said to teem with

often monstrous creatures; Ovid (Met. 4.604—20) and Lucan (Pharsalia 9.696—-727)
relate that as Perseus flew over the Sahara with the head of Medusa, the drops of
its blood generated a multitude of types of serpent.

86-87. chelydri . . . amphisbaenae: This list of serpent species is taken from
Lucan’s list in Pharsalia 9.708—27 (fifteen species in twenty lines). Grandgent notes:
“The chelydri make their path smoke, the jaculi are swift as darts, the pharee furrow the ground with their tails, the chenchres never follow a straight line, the

amphisbaena has two heads.”
88. pestilences: Lucan repeatedly uses the term pestis of the Lybian serpents
that attack Cato’s men (Pharsalia 9.614, 723, 734, and 844).

93. a crevice or a heliotrope: The Italian word for “crevice,” pertugio, suggests an opening through which thieves might escape. Medieval lapidaries ascribe
to the heliotrope-stone (the name means “sun-turner” or “sun-changer’’) the
power of rendering its bearer invisible; in the early Italian prose Novellino and in
Boccaccio’s Decameron 8.3 it is imagined to permit thieves to steal with impunity. See Additional Note 10.
Although the bolgia is deep in Hell, Dante creates the impression of a desert
landscape under a pitiless sun as the appropriate place of punishment for
thieves, whose Latin name (fur), Isidore says, derives from the word for “dark”

(furvo, fusco). Concealment is an essential part of Aquinas’s definition of theft
(Summa theol. 2a 2ae, q. 1, a. 66): “theft is... the concealed seizure of what

belongs to others.” Here detection is constant, inevitable (see lines 127, 130,
and 132).

94-96. their hands were bound .. . knotted in front: The thieves’ hands
(with which they stole) are bound by the snakes. The motif of penetration and
the knotting of snaky bodies suggest copulating serpents (Aristotle, On the generation of animals 1.7.718a18-19: “Serpents copulate by twisting round each
other’). For other violent “couplings” in the bolgia, see 25.51—72 and 100-135.
98. transfixed him . . . to the shoulders: The serpent bites the shade at the
crossing point of the spine and the shoulders (cf. 23.100-102, with note), also
close to where the spinal column enters the brain. Ovid’s Pythagoras, in his summary of the forms of metamorphosis, cites the belief that snakes can be formed

from the spinal marrow of corpses; see Met. 15.389-90: “sunt, qui . . ./ mutari
credant humanas angue medullas” [some believe that . . . the human marrow
changes into a snake]. The reciprocal attacks of the thieves will recall another

375

Inferno

archetypal conflict: the war between serpents and humankind decreed in Gen.
3.15, as the early commentators point out.
97-111. And behold ... its winding sheet: In the first actual metamorphosis of the bolgia, one of the thieves is burned to ashes and immediately
reconstituted. See Gen. 3.19: “for dust thou art, and into dust thou shalt return,”
quoted in the burial service and in the Office for the Dead; see also Eccles. 17.31
and 41.13, Psalm 103.29—30, and the note to lines 106-11.

100. neither O nor I has ever been written so fast: Dante compares the
quickness of the transformation to the time it takes to write two simple letters,
which of course spell io (the first-person-singular pronoun, as well as the name
of Io, a lover of Jove’s transformed into a cow: Met. 1.584; see Derby Chapin
1971). The reference to writing recalls lines 4-6.
101. caught fire ... falling, to ashes: Snake venom was often thought to
include the element of fire, as in Aen. 7.349—56, and Pharsalia 9.741—42 (cf. also

the note to 26.58-60).

105. became the same one again: See Vergil, Georgics 4.444: “in sese redit”
[he returned to himself], of Proteus returning to his “original” shape after many
transformations.
106-11. the great sages profess ... its winding sheet: With the conflagration in line 100, Dante juxtaposes an antithetical comparison with the mythical
Phoenix, which lives for 500 years and then immolates itself on a pyre of spices,
to be reborn from its ashes. Dante’s principal source is Ovid, Met. 15.392—407,
where the Phoenix is one of Pythagoras’s examples of immortality through transformation:
Una est, quae reparet seque ipsa reseminet, ales:
Assyrii phoenica vocant; non fruge neque herbis,
sed turis lacrimis et suco vivit amomi.
[One bird there is, which renews and re-sows itself,

called Phoenix by the Assyrians; on neither grain nor grass
it lives, but on tears of incense and balsam-oil.] (392-94)

A famous poem by Lactantius (ca. 260—ca. 325) interpreted the Phoenix as a
symbol of Christ’s resurrection. The implication is that, like other punishments
in Hell, that of the thieves is a distorted imitation of the Crucifixion.

376

Notes to Canto 24

109. neither grass nor grain: See the quotation from Ovid in the previous
note and compare Inf. 1.103: “Questi non cibera terra né peltro” (of the greyhound, the veltro).

112-14.

like one who falls . . . can bind a man: That is, Vanni’s thunder-

struck attitude is like that of one who has suffered demonic possession or an
epileptic fit. Christ exorcises a “dumb spirit” in possession of a boy (Mark 9.17):
“Who, wheresoever he taketh him, dasheth him, and he foameth, and gnasheth

with the teeth, and pineth away.”
114. occlusion: Buti identifies this as a “gathering of humors, or their vapors,
that enter the passageways between the heart and the brain; once these are closed,
the man falls and becomes insensible.”’ Albertus Magnus (De animalibus 25.7) notes
that some snake poisons work “by closing the passages for the breath in the body
with the thickness of its cold substance.” See Additional Note 10.

124-25. Bestial life ... Vanni Fucci the beast: Vanni Fucci was a violent
member of the White Cancellieri faction of Pistoia (see the note to line 129).
See Psalm 31.9: “Do not become like the horse and the mule, who have no

understanding.” Vanni’s nickname of “beast” suggests an implied “moral” transformation (Vanni “acts” like a beast) (see Convivio 2.7.4).

126. Pistoia was a worthy lair for me: For thieves as beasts with lairs
or dens, see the words of Christ, expelling the money changers from the Temple
(Matt. 21.13): “you have made it a den ofthieves.” Dante is punning on Pistoia
and peste [pestilence], used of the snakes in line 88 (cf. 25.10-12, with
note).

127.

Tell him not to sneak off: The action would be characteristic of the

thief.

129. a bloody, wrathful man: Vanni Fucci was responsible for a number of
crimes and acts of violence, the most serious being the murder, in 1293 or 1294,
of Bertino de’ Vergiolesi; Bertino was a relative of Foccaccia (Vanni) de’
Cancellieri,

a prominent White Guelf of Pistoia (see 32.63, with notes), and was

killed when Foccaccia could not be found.

130. did not feign: Dante insists on the inevitable visibility of the thief here
(see the note to line 93).

Be.

Inferno

132. covered with sad shame: Compare Jer. 2.26: “As the thief is confounded
when taken. . . .” Compare this with Virgil’s cheerful expression in lines 20-21.
137. I stole: The first explicit mention of theft in the canto. For the typology
of thieves in this bolgia, see the note to 25.50-138.

138. the beautiful appointments from the sacristy: Vanni Fucci’s crime
was theft of sacred objects, furtum rei sacrae (an established legal category). In January 1293, Vanni Fucci and others broke into the church of San Zeno in Pistoia

and stole, or attempted to steal, two silver tablets with images of the Virgin and
the apostles from the chapel of San Iacopo.
139. falsely blamed on others: Arrested and held for Vanni Fucci’s crime
was one Rampino di Francesco Foresi; he was only set at liberty in 1295, after
Vanni Fucci informed on an accomplice (Vanni della Monna), with whom the
treasure had been deposited; Vanni della Monna was then executed in place of

Rampino. This “substitution of persons” may be related thematically to the action
of the bolgia; see the note to 25.50-138.

142-50. open your ears... will be stricken by it: This deliberately obscure prophecy refers to some phase of the struggle between the Tuscan Whites
and Blacks. First the Blacks are driven out of Pistoia (1301), and then Flo-

rence drives out the Whites and changes its laws (the Black coup of 13011302; see 6.64—72). Commentators are agreed that the “hot wind” is Moroello
Malaspina, from the Val di Magra, in Lunigiana, northwest of Tuscany, and
that the “roiling clouds” refer to the Tuscan Whites. Beyond that, the prophecy perhaps refers to the taking by Malaspina of the fortress of Serravalle, part
of the Pistoian defenses, in 1302, perhaps to the taking of Pistoia itself by the
Blacks, led by Malaspina, in 1306. The prophecy is more devastating if the
definitive defeat of 1306 is meant, since the Pistoian Blacks succeeded in se-

curing reentry into their city, whereas the Florentine Whites did not (see the
note to 32.69).
In Vanni Fucci’s meteorological allegory, the “hot wind,” containing fire
(hot and dry), and the “roiling cloud,” containing water (cold and moist), collide
to produce a storm. Medieval commentators on Ovid’s Metamorphoses
posit the combination and strife of elements as one of the most “basic” natural
metamorphoses; concluding the canto with a meteorological one balances its
opening.

144. Florence makes new its laws and people: Note the language of metamorphosis, used ironically of the change in population with the expulsion of the

378

Notes to Canto 24

Whites and the hasty revision of legislation to favor the Blacks, as if Florence
were a Phoenix (see 25.143 and note).
148. above Campo Piceno: Dante and his contemporaries took the ager
Picenum, named by Sallust as the place where Catiline was defeated in 63 B.c., to
be a field near Pistoia, the scene of one of Malaspina’s sorties against the Pistoian
Whites.

379

GANIEO.

Al fine de le sue parole il ladro
le mani alz6 con amendue le fiche,

gridando: “Togli Dio, ch’a te le squadro!”
Da indi in qua mi fuor le serpi amiche,
perch’ una li s’avvolse allora il collo,
come dicesse “Non vo’ che piu diche,”
e un/altra a le braccia, e rilegollo,

ribadendo sé stessa si dinanzi
che non potea con esse dare un crollo.
10

Ahi, Pistoia, Pistoia, ché non stanzi
d’incenerarti si che piu non duri,

13)

16

poi che ’n mal fare il seme tuo avanzi?
Per tutt’ i cerchi de lo ’nferno scuri
non vidi spirto in Dio tanto superbo,
non quel che cadde a Tebe git da’ muri.
E] si fuggi che non parlo piu verbo;
e 10 vidi un centauro pien di rabbia
venir chiamando: “Ov’ é, ov’ é l’acerbo?”

19

22,

25

28

Maremma non cred’ io che tante n’abbia
quante bisce elli avea su per la groppa
infin ove comincia nostra labbia.
Sovra le spalle, dietro da la coppa,
con l’ali aperte li giacea un draco,
e quello affuoca qualunque s’intoppa.
Lo mio maestro disse: “Questi é Caco,
che sotto ’] sasso di monte Aventino
di sangue fece spesse volte laco.
Non va co’ suoi fratei per un cammino,
per lo furto che frodolente fece
del grande armento ch’elli ebbe a vicino;

380

CANTO

25

Seventh bolgia, continued: Cacus—more metamorphoses—Agnello,
Pucci Sciancato

At the end of his words the thief raised his hands
with both the figs, crying: “Take them, God, I’m
aiming at you!”
From then on snakes have been my friends,
because one of them wrapped itself around his neck,
as if to say “I won’t let him say more,”
and another around his arms, and bound them up,

tying itself so tight in front that he could not budge.
10

13

16

Ah, Pistoia, Pistoia, why do you not decree your

incineration, so that you may not endure, since you
surpass your sowers in doing ill?
Through all the dark circles of Hell I saw no spirit
so proud against God, not him who fell from the wall
at Thebes.
He fled without saying another word; and I saw a
centaur, full of rage, come crying: “Where is he,
where is he, the unripe one?”

19

22
25

28

I do not think Maremma has as many water
snakes as he had on his back from the rump to
where our shape begins.
On his shoulders, behind his nape, lay a dragon
spreading its wings; it sets fire to any they meet.
My master said: “That is Cacus, who beneath the
rocks of Mount Aventine many times made a lake of
blood.
He does not follow the same path as his brothers,
because he fraudulently stole the great herd he found
close by;

381

Inferno
v

31

onde cessar le sue opere biece
sotto la mazza d’Ercule, che forse
gliene dié cento, e non senti le diece.”

34

Mentre che si parlava, ed el trascorse
e tre spiriti venner sotto noi,

Sill

de’ quai né io né ’] duca mio s’accorse,
se non quando gridar: “Chi siete voi?”
Per che nostra novella si ristette,

e intendemmo pur ad essi poi.
40

Io non li conoscea; ma ei seguette,

come suol seguitar per alcun caso,
che l'un nomar un altro convenette,
43

dicendo: “Cianfa dove fia rimaso?”
Per ch’io, accio che ’] duca stesse attento,

mi puosi 7] dito su dal mento al naso.
46

Se tu se’ or, lettore, a creder lento
cid ch’io dird, non sara maraviglia,

ché io, che ’! vidi, a pena il mi consento.

49

52

Com’ io tenea levate in lor le ciglia,
e un serpente con sei pié si lancia
dinanzi a l’uno, e tutto a lui s’appiglia.
Co’ pié di mezzo li avvinse la pancia
e con li anterior le braccia prese;
poi li addento e l’una e I’altra guancia;

55

li diretani a le cosce distese,

58

e miseli la coda tra ’mbedue
e dietro per le ren su la ritese:
ellera abbarbicata mai non fue
ad alber si, come |’orribil fiera

61

per l’altrui membra awviticchio le sue.
Poi s’appiccar, come di calda cera
fossero stati, e mischiar lor colore,

né l’un né l’altro gia parea quel ch’era:
64

67

come procede innanzi da l’ardore,
per lo papiro suso, un color bruno
che non é nero ancora e ’] bianco more.
Li altri due ’] riguardavano, e ciascuno
gridava: “Ome, Agnel, come ti muti!
Vedi che gia non se’ né due né uno.”
382

Canto 25

Si

34

37

therefore his cross-eyed deeds ended under
Hercules’ club, which perhaps gave him a hundred,
but he did not feel ten of them.”
As he was speaking, the centaur went by and
three spirits came below us, whom neither I nor my
leader perceived
until they cried: “Who are you?” For this reason
our talk ceased, and they alone claimed our attention.
I did not know them; but it happened, as it often

40

does by some chance, that one of them had to name
another,
43

46

saying: “Where has Cianfa stayed?” Therefore I, so
that my leader should pay attention, stretched my
finger from chin to nose.
If now, reader, you are slow to believe what I say,
that will be no marvel, for I, who saw it, hardly allow

it.
49

52

55

58

61

As I was raising my brows toward them, a serpent
with six feet threw itself on one of them and
embraced him closely.
Its middle feet it wrapped around his waist, with
its forefeet it seized his arms; then it pierced both his
cheeks with its fangs;
its hind feet it spread along his thighs, and put its
tail between them, extending it up along his loins:
ivy never took root on a tree so tightly as the
horrible beast grew vinelike around the other’s limbs.
After they had adhered to each other like hot wax
and had mixed their colors, neither seemed what it

64

67

had been:
as, when paper burns, a dark color moves up it
preceding the flame; it is not yet black, but the white
is dying.
The other two were staring at him, and each cried:
“Oh me, Agnel, how you are changing! See, already

you are neither two nor one.”

383

Inferno

70

73

76

79

82

Gia eran li due capi un divenuti,
quando n’apparver due figure miste
in una faccia, ov’ eran due perduti.
Fersi le braccia due di quattro liste;
le cosce con le gambe e ’] ventre e ’] casso
divenner membra che non fuor, mai viste.
Ogne primaio aspetto ivi era casso;
due e nessun |’imagine perversa
parea, e tal sen gio con lento passo.
Come ’] ramarro sotto la gran fersa
dei di canicular, cangiando sepe,
folgore par se la via attraversa:
si pareva, venendo verso |’epe
de li altri due, un serpentello acceso,

85

88

livido e nero come gran di pepe;
e quella parte onde prima é preso
nostro alimento a !’un di lor trafisse;
poi cadde giuso innanzi lui disteso.
Lo trafitto ’] mird, ma nulla disse;
anzi, co’ pié fermati, sbadigliava

91

pur come sonno o febbre I’assalisse.
Elli ’] serpente e quei lui riguardava;
Pun per la piaga e l’altro per la bocca
fummavan forte, e 1 fummo si scontrava.

94

Taccia Lucano omai, la dow’ e’ tocca
del misero Sabello e di Nasidio,

e attenda a udir quel ch’or si scocca.
OF

Taccia di Cadmo e d’Aretusa Ovidio,

ché se quello in serpente e quella in fonte
converte poetando, io non lo ‘nvidio,
100

103

106

ché due nature mai a fronte a fronte
non trasmuto si ch’amendue le forme
a cambiar lor matera fosser pronte.
Insieme si rispuosero a tai norme
che ’] serpente la coda in forca fesse,
e ’l feruto ristrinse insieme |’orme.
Le gambe con le cosce seco stesse
s’appiccar si che ’n poco la giuntura
non facea segno alcun che si paresse.
384

Canto 25

70

Already the two heads had become one, so that
two sets of features seemed mingled in one face,

73

76

79

82

where two heads were lost.
The arms became two strips from four; the thighs
and the legs and the belly and the chest became
members never before seen.
Every former appearance there was shattered; two
and none the perverse image seemed, and off it
moved with slow steps.
As the lizard, changing hedges under the great
scourge of the dog days, seems lightning as it crosses
the road:
so seemed an inflamed little serpent, livid and black
like a grain of pepper, coming toward the bellies of
the other two;

85

and one of them it pierced in the place where our
first nourishment is taken; then it fell stretched out

88

91

94

before him.
The one transfixed gazed at it but said nothing;
rather, standing still, he yawned as if sleep or fever
assailed him.
He was gazing at the serpent, and the serpent at
him; one through his wound and the other through
its mouth was sending forth smoke, and the smoke
met.
Let Lucan now be silent, where he touches on
miserable Sabellus and Nasidius, and let him listen to

what the bow now looses.
97

About Cadmus and Arethusa let Ovid be silent,

for if in his poetry he converts him into a serpent and
her into a fountain, I do not envy him,
100

103

106

for never two natures face to face did he
transmute so that both forms were ready to exchange
their matter.
They answered each other according to this
rule: that the serpent split its tail in two, and the
wounded one drew his soles together.
His legs and thighs so adhered that soon the
joining left no mark that could be seen.

385

Inferno

109

112

Togliea la coda fessa la figura
che si perdeva 1a, e la sua pelle
si facea molle, e quella di la dura.
Io vidi intrar le braccia per l’ascelle,

e i due pié de la fiera, ch’eran corti,
115

tanto allungar quanto accorciavan quelle.
Poscia li pié di rietro, insieme attorti,
diventaron lo membro che |’uom cela,

118

121

e ’] misero del suo n’avea due porti.
Mentre che ’] fummo l’uno e I’altro vela
di color novo e genera ’] pel suso
per luna parte, e da l’altra il dipela,
Pun si levo e l’altro cadde giuso,
non torcendo pero le lucerne empie,

124

127)

130

sotto le quai ciascun cambiava muso.
Quel ch’era dritto il trasse ver’ le tempie,
e di troppa matera ch’in la venne
uscir li orecchi de le gote scempie;
cio che non corse in dietro e si ritenne
di quel soverchio, fé naso a la faccia
e le labbra ingrosso quanto convenne.
Quel che giacéa 11 muso innanzi caccia,
e li orecchi ritira per la testa
come face le corna la lumaccia;

133

e la lingua, ch’avéa unita e presta
prima a parlar, si fende, e la forcuta
ne l’altro si richiude; e ’1 fummo resta.

136

L’anima ch’era fiera divenuta,

139

suffolando si fugge per la valle,
e l’altro dietro a lui parlando sputa.
Poscia li volse le novelle spalle,
e disse a l’altro: “I’ vo’ che Buoso corra,

142

145

com’ ho fatt’ i0, carpon per questo calle.”
Cosi vid’ io la settima zavorra
mutare e trasmutare; e qui mi scusi
la novita se fior la penna abborra.
E avvegna che li occhi miei confusi
fossero alquanto e l’animo smagato,
non poter quei fuggirsi tanto chiusi
386

Canto 25

109

The cleft tail took the shape the other was losing,
and its skin softened, but over there it hardened.

12

I saw both his arms withdraw into the armpits,
and the beast’s two feet, which were short, lengthen

as much as the other’s were shortening.
115

Then the hind feet, twisted together, became the
member which a man hides, and the other wretch out

118

of his had extended two feet.
While the smoke veils both of them with a new
color, generating hair on one side, and peeling it off
on the other,

121

one stood up and the other fell down, but they
did not turn aside their pitiless lanterns, under whose

gaze each was changing his snout.
124

He who was erect drew his in toward the temples,

and of the excess matter made ears that came out
over narrow cheeks;
127

130

what of that excess did not go to the rear became
a nose for the face and filled out the cheeks as much
as was fitting.
He who was lying down, extends his snout
forward and withdraws his ears into his head as the
snail does its horns;

133

and his tongue, which had previously been whole
and ready to speak, is split, and the other’s forked

136

159

one is joined; and the smoke stops.
The soul who had become a beast fled hissing
through the valley, and the other spits as he speaks
after him.
Then he turned his new back on him and said to
the other: “I want Buoso to run, as I have, on all sixes

142

145

along this path.”
Thus I saw the seventh cargo change and change
again; and here let the novelty excuse me if my pen
ever falters.
And although my eyes were somewhat confused
and my spirit robbed of power, the souls could not
flee so secretly

387

Inferno

148

ch’i’ non scorgessi ben Puccio Sciancato;
ed era quel che sol, di tre compagni

151

che venner prima, non era mutato;
laltr’ era quel che tu, Gaville, piagni.

388

Canto 25

148

that I did not see clearly Puccio Sciancato; and he
alone, of the three companions who had arrived
earlier, had not been changed;

151

the other was the one that makes you, Gaville,

weep.

as

389

NOTES

1-2. At the end of his words . . the figs:
Vanni Fucci makes with both hands the obscene
gesture (signifying the female organ) made by
placing the thumb between the middle and index
fingers (Figure 5), pointed upward. The city of
Prato in 1297 decreed “whoever makes the figs
or shows his buttocks to heaven or to the image
of God ... to pay ten lire each time, or be
whipped.” In 1228 the citizens of Pistoia fixed
on the Carmignano tower two “figs” of marble,
aimed at Florence (Villani, Chronicle 6.5).

Figure 5. A fist making the “fig.”

6. I won’t let him say more: Vanni Fucci is silenced, but the serpents “speak”
by their action; another reference to speech and its loss (see 24.6466, with note,
and lines 25.16, 45, 88, 94, 97, and 137).

7. bound them up, tying itself so tight: Some commentators invoke Aen.
2.213—24, which describes Laoco6n in the coils of the sea serpents sent by the
gods; like Laoco6n, Vanni Fucci has just prophesied.

10-12. Pistoia . . . surpass your sowers: The name Pistoia (see the note to
24.88) was sometimes said by its enemies to reflect its origin in the “pestilential” revolt of Catiline (see Villani, Chronicle 1.32); Dante connected the

snakes/thieves with pestilence in 24.88 (see the note to 24.126). The invitation to self-incineration (line 11) echoes the immolation of Vanni Fucci

(24.100-102).
15. him who fell from the wall at Thebes: Capaneus (14.46—72). Mention
of fratricidal Thebes (see line 97: founded by Cadmus with the dragon’s teeth)
follows on mention of Pistoia, where the feud between the White and Black
Guelfs was said to originate.

17. a centaur, full of rage: Said in line 25 to be Cacus, although there is not
much basis for representing Cacus as a centaur; according to Virgil he was
semihomo [half-man, Aen. 8.194] and semiferus [half-beast, 8.267], gigantic (8.199),
covered with fur (8.266), and, as a son of Vulcan, able to breathe fire (8.198,
251-58). For Livy, he was merely a shepherd (1.7).

390

Notes to Canto 25

19. Maremma:
day (cf. 13.7—9).

This swampy coastal region was rife with snakes in Dante’s

21. where our shape begins: For the meaning of this division of the body,
see 12.84 and 17.82, with notes.

23-24. a dragon ... to any they meet: The dragon on Cacus’s shoulders
seems to derive from the fire-breathing chimera on Turnus’s helmet (Aen.
7.78588). For other references to smoke, see 24.49—51 and 25.9193, 118, and
133-35, with notes.

25-33.

That is Cacus ... ten of them: In the story as told by Livy and

Vergil, Cacus stole a number of bulls and heifers from Hercules’ herd; in order

to conceal his theft, he dragged them by the tails into his cave under the Aventine
(one of the seven hills of the future Rome). According to Vergil, Hercules tore
open the mountain to find his stock, who were lowing in response to the others, and killed Cacus in spite of his smoke screen.
27. made a lake of blood: Vergil implies that Cacus both delighted in slaughter
and ate human flesh (Aen. 8.195—97).

31. cross-eyed: Move properly, “looking askance” (with envy; cf. 6.91, with
note).

32. Hercules’ club: The first mention of Hercules’ name in Hell. Dante knew
Livy’s account (1.7), in which Hercules clubs Cacus to death; in the Aeneid, he
strangles him. For Hercules’ status as an analogue of Christ, see 9.54, 98, with
notes.

33. gave him a hundred: The Italian means literally “gave him a hundred of
them [i.e., blows]

43. Where has Cianfa stayed: Most commentators understand Cianfa to
reappear as the serpent of line 50. The early commentators identify him as Cianfa
Donati, thus a member of the powerful Donati family, known from documents

to have been alive in 1282 or 1283, dead by 1289. Nothing else is known about
him.

45. stretched my finger from chin to nose: That is, he made the classic
gesture enjoining silence, presumably because he recognizes the name Cianfa

Sp

Inferno

(another silencing; see the note to line 6). See Additional Note 10. For the
pilgrim’s curiosity, see 22.37—39.
46-48.

If now, reader ... allow it: The sixth address to the reader in the

Inferno (see 8.94, with note), again stressing the incredibility of the events and
the narrator’s reliability (cf. 16.124—29 with notes, and 13.25—51).
50-138. a serpent with six feet ... spits as he speaks after him: The
precise logic of the metamorphoses as punishment of the thieves has not been
fully explained; several scholars suggest that given the scholastic view of property as an extension of the person (see the note to 11.29-51), theft of the property of another would thus be appropriately punished with loss of the thief’s
person—that is, body. See Additional Note 10.

51-72. embraced him closely . . . were lost: For this “parodic love-kiss”
(Gmelin) and its sequel, Dante draws on Ovid’s narrative of the nymph Salmacis
and the boy Hermaphroditus fusing into a single ambisexual being (Met. 4.356—
88). The parallels are close; note especially Dante’s simile of vine and tree (lines
58-60), and the fusion of the two forms (lines 69-72), and compare with:

utve solent hederae longos intexere truncos
sic ubi complexu coierunt membra tenaci,
nec duo sunt sed forma duplex, nec femina dici
nec puer ut possit, neutrumque utrumque videtur
[as ivies are wont to weave around tall trunks

thus when the limbs cohered in tight embrace
they are not two, but a double form, so that it can be called

neither woman nor boy, and it seems neither and both] (4.365—79)

Medieval commentators on Ovid took the episode of Salmacis and
Hermaphroditus to be a representation of coitus, the fusion of the two signifying the fusing of the sperm with the mother’s blood in the womb.
64. as, when paper burns. . . the white is dying: In 24.100, Vanni Fucci’s
reconstitution was compared to the writing of letters; here the comparison is
drawn from the support for writing.

68. Agnel: The early commentators identify him as Agnello dei Brunelleschi, member of another prominent noble family. See also the note to lines
140-41.

392

Notes to Canto 25

69. you are neither two nor one: A line clearly alluding to Ovid’s “neutrumque
utrumque videtur” [seemed neither and both] quoted in the note to lines 51-72.
For Dante, this confusion of forms parodies the union of two natures, human and
divine, in Christ (see the notes to 12.12 and 83-84). There may be another refer-

ence to the Phoenix (24.107): Lactantius adapts Ovid’s lines quoted above to the

Phoenix as “femina seu mas. . . seu neutrum seu . . . utrumque” [female or male
... orneither or. . . both] (the allusion is to the hermaphroditism often attributed
to the risen Christ) (see 28.125).

75. members never before seen: Compare to the poet’s boast of showing
something never before seen (line 100) and the “novelty” (line 144) of the bolgia.
77-78. two and none the perverse image seemed: A variation on line 69,
closer to Ovid’s phrasing.
79-80. the great scourge of the dog days: The dog days, mid-July to midSeptember, when the star Sirius, in Canis Major (“the greater dog,” one of the
hounds of Orion), rises and sets with the sun: their joining was thought responsible for the hot weather. Again, the sun’s heat is associated with the thieves’

punishment, as if driving the ceaseless changes (see the note to lines 91-93).
82. toward the bellies: Translating epe [livers]. In the Platonic tradition, the
liver is the seat of appetites relating to nourishment and reproduction (see the
note to 30.102).

83-84. an inflamed little serpent . . . like a grain of pepper: The pepper
grain was thought to contain fire because of its sharp taste and its color (most
peppercorns, originally white, green, or pink, were charred before shipping).
For the association of fire and snakes, see the notes to 24.86—87 and 101-2.

85-86. the place where our first nourishment is taken: The navel. Here
begins the third of the major metamorphoses in the bolgia (24.97-105, 25.49—
78, and 25.85—138). In each, the victim is bitten at a different point: in the first,
at the juncture of shoulders and neck; in the second, in the face (and the tail is
thrust through the legs of the victim); and in the third, at the navel, where the

fetus is nourished. Each subsequent transformation is slower and more elaborate: the first, all but instantaneous, as if a figure for the violent brevity of human
life; the second is deliberate and involved, like sexual union; and the third hal-

lucinated, laborious, and protracted, gestating unheard-of beings.
87. it fell stretched out: Ovid’s Cadmus (see line 97) falls down as he is changed
into a snake: “in longam tenditur alvum”’ [his belly became long] (Met. 4.576);

393

Inferno

“in pectusque cadit pronus” [and he fell prone on his breast] (579) (see the note
to line 121). For the repeated falling down in this bolgia, see 24.54 and 25.15,
121.
89-90. yawned . . . as if sleep or fever assailed him: Sleepiness and stupefaction are symptoms of snakebite poisoning, according to Albertus Magnus (De
animalibus 25.7). See also Lucan, Pharsalia 9.815-18.

91-93. He was gazing ... the smoke met: The reciprocal gaze and the
mingling smoke seem to be mechanisms whereby the shades exchange shapes:
analogies with erotic viewing, approach, embrace, consummation, and gestation are implicit. The “smoke” seems almost an active agent (perhaps related to
the “spirit” that in medieval views of conception is the active principle in semen);
here it pours from breaches in the body, mouth or wound. The reciprocal gazing suggests that the changing is also effected by seeing, the form of one thief
being passed to the other via the light (“lanterns,” line 122), as the light of the
stars was thought to impose form on sublunary things. See also the note to lines
100-135:

94-102. Let Lucan . .. let Ovid . .. exchange their matter: The poet’s
boast here is an instance of a well-established literary topos in which the poet
proclaims his novelty and modernity and his surpassing his models (e.g., Claudian,
In Rufinum line 283: “taceat superata vetustas” [let antiquity, surpassed, be silent];
cited in Curtius 1953).

95. Sabellus and Nasidius: Two soldiers in Lucan’s Pharsalia who die horrible deaths from snakebite (9.761—804): Sabellus’s body is liquefied, and
Nasidius’s is bloated to enormous size. Sabellus’s fate (compared to melting snow)
may be echoed in that of Arethusa (see the note to line 97), while the loss of
features in Nasidius is perhaps reflected in the current transformations.
97. Cadmus

and Arethusa: Ovid’s account (Met. 4.563—603) of the trans-

formation into serpents of Cadmus and his wife Harmonia is Dante’s principal
model for the third transformation (see the notes to lines 100-135). The nymph
Arethusa melted into a stream in order to escape Alpheus; but he, too, became

a river and joined her (Met. 5.572-641).

98-99. he converts . . . I do not envy him: The line (separated in the translation, but a single line in the Italian) indicates the close identification of the
portrayal of metamorphosis with the poet’s linguistic power (cf. line 144 and
see Additional Note 10).

100-135. two natures face to face ... the smoke stops: Dante’s order
for the “exchange of matter” of the two thieves is related to the order of the

394

Notes to Canto 25

transformation of Cadmus (rear legs, arms, hands, and tongue: Met. 4.576-89),

mirroring Ovid’s text as the thieves mirror each other. Dante’s order is: rear
legs, forelegs, hands, and penis; body hair, heads, and tongues (the stopping point;
see the note to line 133). For details of Cadmus’s transformation utilized in the
canto, see the notes to lines 76-77, 86, 121, 123, and 133.

116. the member which a man hides: The penis (related to the figs of line
2), hidden in the rhetorical periphrasis. The hiding began with the use of figleaf aprons by Adam and Eve after the Fall (Gen. 3.7).

118. the smoke veils both: Compare the spewing of smoke by Cacus (see the
note to line 24), allegorized as the concealment required by thieves (Fulgentius).
121. one stood up and the other fell down: The difference between erect
and prone posture, or upward and downward gaze, often mentioned in these
two cantos (see 24.54, 112, and 131; 25.15, 49, and 86), traditionally distin-

guishes human from animal; see Met. 1.84—86:

pronaque cum spectent animalia cetera terram,
os homini sublime dedit caelumque videre
iussit et erectos ad sidera tollere vultus.
[while other animals, prone, gaze on the earth,
he (Prometheus) gave man a face erect, bade him see
the heaven and lift his brow to the stars.]

122. their pitiless lanterns: See Matt. 6.22: “The light [/ucerna] of thy body
is thy eye.” The reciprocal gazing here is another reference to the transformations of Cadmus and Harmonia (see line 97 and note), who must watch each
other; it had been foretold that Cadmus would one day be seen as a snake (“et

tu spectabere serpens,” Met. 3.98). The pitiless gaze is related to the Medusa (see
the notes to 32.130—31 and 33.55-—57).

128. excess . . . a nose: Note the puns on Ovid’s Latin names (Publius Ovidius
Naso, the last nome meaning “nose”) here and at lines 45 and 97 (Sowell 1991);

the name of one of Dante’s chief models is repeatedly inscribed in the text.
133-35. tongue . . . is split . . . the smoke stops: Also the last act of Cadmus’s
transformation (Met. 4.586—87): “lingua repente/ in partes est fissa duas” [the
tongue is suddenly split in two] (see 24.6466 and note). The splitting of the
instrument of rational speech is the end point of the third transformation.
Benvenuto wisecracks that humans, not snakes, are truly “bilingual” (bilinguis)—

that is, have lying tongues.

995

Inferno

137. hissing . . . spits: One thief, now a serpent, hisses; the other spits clumsily with its new tongue, as if still trying to spew poison. Bestiary lore had it that
human spittle was venomous to serpents, and spitting was used as an exorcistic
gesture against the devil (see Boccaccio, Decameron 7.1.27—28).
140-41.

I want Buoso

to run, as I have, on all sixes: Dante’s carpone

normally means “on all fours.” Buoso is variously identified by the early commentators; modern opinion inclines to see him as Buoso Donati, another mem-

ber of this powerful family (see the note to line 43), a nephew of the one impersonated by Gianni Schicchi (30.40—45). L’Anonimo says that Buoso, having
stolen while in office, induced the sinner speaking here, Francesco de’
Cavalcanti (see the note to line 151), to steal in his place, perhaps explaining
Francesco’s thirst for vengeance (Momigliano in Mazzoni 1972); compare with
the note to 24.99.
142. seventh cargo: The metaphor is based on the concavity of the bolgia,
curved like a ship’s hull, and the previous reference to the Libyan desert;

in antiquity and the Middle Ages, sand and gravel were used as ballast for
ships.
143. change and change again: In Italian, mutare [change] and trasmutare
[transmute] capture the dominant note of the bolgia (see note to 24.1—21) anda
fundamental condition of fallen humanity. After the conclusion of the previous
canto (24.144) with a Florence that “makes new its laws and people,” the presence here of five Florentines, three of them Black Guelfs and several from families who had converted to the Guelfs or to the Black faction, suggests that political transformation is thematized here as well.
144, if my pen ever falters: Slips of the pen are analogous, in scholastic discussions, to nature’s failure to realize fully the forms imposed by the stars: “for
although art acts for the sake of something, still it happens that in things made
according to art mistakes are found; for sometimes the grammarian writes
incorrectly” (Aquinas, In Aristotelis Physicam 2.14); see 24.6, the blunted “pen”
of the writing of frost, and 24.100, with notes.

145. my eyes were somewhat confused: The pilgrim, gazing on so many
transformations, is dazed, like the thieves themselves; for other instances in

Malebolge of the pilgrim’s fascination with what he sees, see 26.43—45 (implicit),
29.46, and 30.131-32.
148. Puccio Sciancato: This third thief (see line 35) is Puccio Galigai, called
“the lame” (sciancato), roughly contemporaneous with the others; he had the
reputation of committing “elegant” thefts and was notable for having changed
parties from the Ghibellines to the Guelfs.

396

Notes to Canto 25

151. the one that makes you, Gaville, weep: The reference to Gaville identifies this thief, formerly the small serpent (line 83), as Francesco de’ Cavalcanti,

known as Guercio [cross-eyed]. He was murdered by people from Gaville, near
Figline in the upper valley of the Arno; his death was savagely avenged by his
powerful family, making the town “weep.”

Bo

Godi, Fiorenza, poi che se’ si grande
che per mare e per terra batti ’ali,

e per lo ’nferno tuo nome si spande!
Tra li ladron trovai cinque cotali
tuoi cittadini onde mi ven vergogna,
e tu in grande orranza non ne sali.
Ma se presso al mattin del ver si sogna,
tu sentirai, di qua da picciol tempo,
di quel che Prato, non ch/altri, t’'agogna;
10

e se gia fosse, non saria per tempo.
Cosi foss’ ei, da che pur esser dee!

ché piu mi gravera, com’ piu m’attempo.
13

Noi ci partimmo, e su per le scalee
che n’avean fatto i borni a scender pria,
rimonto ’] duca mio e trasse mee;

16

19

e proseguendo la solinga via
tra le schegge e tra ’ rocchi de lo scoglio,
lo pié sanza la man non si spedia.
Allor mi dolsi, e ora mi ridoglio
quando drizzo la mente a cid ch’io vidi,

22

e piu lo ’ngegno affreno ch’i’ non soglio,
perche non corra che virtu nol guidi,
si che, se stella bona o miglior cosa
m’ha dato ’] ben, ch’io stessi nol m’invidi.

25

Quante ’] villan ch’al poggio si riposa,
nel tempo che colui che ’1 mondo schiara
la faccia sua a noi tien meno ascosa,

28

come la mosca cede a la zanzara
vede lucciole git per la vallea,
forse cola dov’ e’ vendemmia e ara:
398

CANTO

26

Denunciation of Florence—eighth bolgia: counselors offraud—Ulysses
and Diomedes—Ulysses’ last voyage

Rejoice, Florence, since you are so great that on
sea and land you beat your wings, and your name
spreads through Hell!
Among the thieves I found five such citizens of
yours that I feel shame, and you do not rise to
honor by them.
But if near morning one dreams the truth, you
will feel, a short time from now, something of what
Prato, not to speak of others, desires for you;
10

13

16

19

pape

25

and if it had already come, it would not be early.
Would it already were, since it must come! for it will
weigh on me more, the older I grow.
We left, and up along the steps made for us
earlier by the projecting bourns, my leader mounted,
drawing me after him;
and as we pursued our solitary way among the
splinters and rocks of the ridge, our feet could not
proceed without our hands.
Then I grieved, and now I grieve again, when I
consider what I saw, and I rein in my wit more than
is my custom,
that it may not run without virtue guiding it, so
that, if a good star or something better has given me
what is good, I may not deprive myself of it.
As many fireflies as the peasant—resting on the
hillside in the season when he who lights the world
least hides from us his face,

28

when the fly gives way to the mosquito—sees
down along the valley, perhaps where he harvests
and plows:

399

Inferno

oil

34

S7

di tante fiamme tutta risplendea
l’ottava bolgia, si com’ io m’accorsi
tosto che fui 1a ’ve ’] fondo parea.
E qual colui che si vengio con li orsi
vide ’] carro d’Elia al dipartire,
quando i cavalli al cielo erti levorsi,
che nol potea si con li occhi seguire
ch’el vedesse altro che la fiamma sola,

si come nuvoletta, in su salire:
40

tal si move ciascuna per la gola
del fosso, ché nessuna mostra ’] furto,

43

e ogne fiamma un peccatore invola.
Io stava sovra ’] ponte a veder surto,
si che s’io non avessi un ronchion preso,

caduto sarei git sanz’ esser urto.
46

49

a2

55

E ’] duca, che mi vide tanto atteso,

disse: “Dentro dai fuochi son li spirti;
catun si fascia di quel ch’elli € inceso.”
“Maestro mio,” rispuos’ io, “per udirti
son io pit certo; ma gia m’era avviso
che cosi fosse, e gia voleva dirti:
chi é ’n quel foco che vien si diviso
di sopra, che par surger de la pira
dov’ Etedcle col fratel fu miso?”
Rispuose a me: “La dentro si martira
Ulisse

58

61

e Diomede, e cosi insieme

a la vendetta vanno come a l’ira.
E dentro da la lor fiamma si geme
lagguato del caval che fé la porta
onde usci de’ Romani il gentil seme;
piangevisi entro |’arte per che, morta,
Deidamia ancor si duol d’ Achille;

64

67

e del Palladio pena vi si porta.”
“S’ei posson dentro da quelle faville
parlar,” diss’ io, “maestro, assai ten priego,
e ripriego che ’! priego vaglia mille,

che non mi facci de l’attender niego
fin che la fiamma cornuta qua vegna:
vedi che del disio ver’ lei mi piego

}??

400

Canto 26

31

34

37

with so many flames the eighth pocket was all
shining, as I perceived when I was where I could
see its depths.
And as he who avenged himself with the bears
saw Elijah’s chariot departing, when the horses rose
so steeply to Heaven
that he could not follow them with his eyes so as
to see more than the flame alone, like a little cloud,

40

43

46

49

52

55

58

rising up:
so each moves along the throat of the ditch, for
none displays its theft, and every flame steals away a
sinner.
I was standing erect on the bridge in order to see,
so that if I had not grasped a projection, I would
have fallen without being pushed.
And my leader, who saw me so intent, said:
“Within the fires are the spirits; each is swathed in
that which burns him inwardly.”
“My master,” I replied, “hearing you I am surer;
but already it seemed to me that such was the case,
and already I wanted to ask you:
who is in that fire that comes so divided above
that it seems to be rising from the pyre where
Eteocles was put with his brother?”
He answered me: “There within are punished
Ulysses and Diomedes; thus together they go to
punishment as they went to anger.
And within their flame they bemoan the deceit of
the horse that made the gate to send forth the
Romans’

61

64

67

noble seed;

there within they weep for the art that makes
Deidamia, though dead, still grieve for Achilles; and
there they bear the punishment for the Palladium.”
“If they can speak within those flames,” I said,
“master, much do I beg you, and beg again that
each prayer may be worth a thousand,
that you not refuse to wait until the horned flame
comes here: see that I bend toward it with desire!”

401

Inferno

70

Ed elli a me: “La tua preghiera ¢ degna
di molta loda, e io pero l’accetto;

Ye

ma fa che la tua lingua si sostegna.
Lascia parlare a me, ch’i’ ho concetto
cid che tu vuoi; ch’ei sarebbero schivi,

76

WS

perch’ e’ fuor greci, forse del tuo detto.”
Poi che la fiamma fu venuta quivi
dove parve al mio duca tempo e loco,
in questa forma lui parlare audivi:
“O voi che siete due dentro ad un foco,

s’io meritai di voi mentre ch’io vissi,
82

s’io meritai di voi assai Oo poco,
quando nel mondo li alti versi scrissi,
non vi movete; ma |’un di voi dica

85

dove per lui perduto a morir gissi.”
Lo maggior corno de la fiamma antica
comincio a crollarsi mormorando,

pur come quella cui vento affatica;
88

indi la cima qua e la menando,

come fosse la lingua che parlasse,
gitto voce di fuori e disse: “Quando
i

mi diparti’ da Circe, che sottrasse

me piu d’un anno la presso a Gaeta,
prima che si Enéa la nomasse,
94

Sif

né dolcezza di figlio, né la pieta
del vecchio padre, né ’] debito amore
lo qual dovea Penelopé far lieta,
vincer potero dentro a me |’ardore
ch’i’ ebbi a divenir del mondo esperto
e de li vizi umani e del valore;

100

103

ma misi me per l’alto mare aperto
sol con un legno e con quella compagna
picciola da la qual non fui diserto.
L’un lito e l’altro vidi infin la Spagna,
fin nel Morrocco, e l’isola d’i Sardi

106

e l’altre che quel mare intorno bagna.
Io e’ compagni eravam vecchi e tardi
quando venimmo a quella foce stretta
dov’ Ercule segno li suoi riguardi
402

Canto 26

82

And he to me: “Your prayer is worthy of much
praise, and therefore | grant it; but see that your
tongue restrain itself.
Let me speak, for I have conceived what you
wish; for perhaps they would shun, because
they were Greeks, your words.”
When the flame had come to where my leader
thought it the time and place, in this form I heard
him speak:
“O you who are two within one fire, if I deserved
from you while I lived, if I deserved from you
greatly or little
when in the world I wrote my high verses, do not

85

went to die.”
The greater horn of the ancient flame began to

70

ue

76

79

move away; but let one of you tell where, lost, he

shake, murmuring, like one a wind belabors;
88

91

then, moving its peak here and there, as if it were
a tongue that spoke, it cast out a voice and said:
“When
I departed from Circe, who held me back more
than a year there near Gaeta, before Aeneas gave it
that name,

94

neither the sweetness of a son, nor compassion for
my old father, nor the love owed to Penelope, which

should have made her glad,
Di

100

103

could conquer within me the ardor that I had to
gain experience of the world and of human vices and
worth;
but I put out on the deep, open sea alone, with
one ship and with that little company by which I had
not been deserted.
The one shore and the other I saw as far as Spain,

as far as Morocco, and the island of the Sardinians
106

and the others whose shores are bathed by that sea.
I and my companions were old and slow when we
came to that narrow strait which Hercules marked
with his warnings

403

109

accio che l’uom piu oltre non si metta;
da la man destra mi lasciai Sibilia,

2

115

da l’altra gia m’avea lasciata Setta.
‘O frati,’ dissi, ‘che per cento milia
perigli siete giunti a l’occidente,
a questa tanto picciola vigilia
d’i nostri sensi ch’é del rimanente
non vogliate negar |’esperienza,
di retro al sol, del mondo sanza gente.

118

Considerate la vostra semenza:
fatti non foste a viver come bruti,

ma per seguir virtute e canoscenza.’
121

124

Li miei compagni fec’ io si aguti
con questa orazion picciola al cammino,
che a pena poscia li avrei ritenuti;
e volta nostra poppa nel mattino,
de’ remi facemmo ali al folle volo,

127

sempre acquistando dal lato mancino.
Tutte le stelle gia de I’altro polo
vedea la notte, e 7] nostro tanto basso

130

che non surgéa fuor del marin suolo.
Cinque volte racceso e tante casso
lo lume era di sotto da la luna,

133

136

139

142

poi che ’ntrati eravam ne l’alto passo,
quando n’apparve una montagna bruna
per la distanza, e parvemi alta tanto
quanto veduta non avéa alcuna.
Noi ci allegrammo, e tosto torno in pianto,

ché de la nova terra un turbo nacque
e percosse del legno il primo canto.
Tre volte il fe girar con tutte l’acque,
a la quarta levar la poppa in suso
e la prora ire in git, com’ altrui piacque,
infin che ’] mar fu sovra noi richiuso.”

404

Canto 26

109

so that one should not go further; on the right
hand I had left Seville, on the other I had already left
Ceuta.

112

115

118
121

‘O brothers,’ I said, “who through a hundred

thousand perils have reached the west, to this so
brief vigil
of our senses that remains, do not deny the
experience, following the sun, of the world without
people.
Consider your sowing: you were not made to live
like brutes, but to follow virtue and knowledge.’
My companions I made so sharp for the voyage,
with this little oration, that after it I could hardly
have held them back;

124

127,

130

133

136

139

and, turning our stern toward the morning, of our
oars we made wings for the mad flight, always
gaining on the left side.
Already all the stars of the other pole I saw at
night, and our own pole so low that it did not rise
above the floor of the sea.
Five times renewed, and as many diminished, had
been the light beneath the moon, since we had
entered the deep pass,
when there appeared to us a mountain, dark in
the distance, and it seemed to me higher than any I
had seen.
We rejoiced, but it quickly turned to weeping; for
from the new land a whirlwind was born and struck
the forequarter of the ship.
Three times it made the ship to turn about with all
the waters, at the fourth to raise its stern aloft and

142

the prow to go down, as it pleased another,
until the sea had closed over us.”

Ne
405

NOTES

1-3. Rejoice, Florence ... through Hell: The text leaves it to the reader
to infer the nature of the winged creature representing Florence in this bitter
apostrophe. After the reptilian metamorphoses of the previous two cantos, it is
natural to think of a reptile with wings: a dragon. The commentators note that
an inscription in hexameters, dated 1255, still visible on the Florentine Palazzo
del Bargello, describes Florence as “que mare, que terram, que totum possidet
orbem” [who possesses the sea, the land, and the whole globe]; curiously, the
phrase is a quotation from Lucan’s Pharsalia 1.109, where it describes the self-

destructiveness of Rome (it is quoted by Dante in Monarchia 2.8). The inscription continues: “per quem regnantem fit felix Tuscia tota” [through whose reign
all Tuscany is made happy], to which Dante seems to allude sarcastically in line 9.
Mention of Italian cities is frequent in the Malebolge: Mantua (Canto 20),
Prato (25.1—3), Venice (Canto 21), various cities of Romagna (Canto 27), and
Arezzo (Canto 29); there are many denunciations: 18.58-63 (Bologna), 21.37—42
(Lucca), 25.10—15 (Pistoia), and 29.121—32 (Siena); beyond Malebolge: 33.79-90
(Pisa), 33.151-57 (Genoa), and Purg. 6.127—51 (Florence) (cf. Luke 10.13-15

for Jesus’ denunciations of wicked cities.)
4. five such citizens of yours: Those identified in 25.43, 68, 140, 148, and
Syl

7-12. But if near morning . . . the older I grow: The idea that early-morning dreams are prophetic is ancient; the commentators cite Ovid, Heroides
19.195—96: “namque sub auroram iam dormitante Lucina/ tempore quo cerni
somnia vera solent” [for near the dawn, after the moon has set, in the time when

true dreams are usually seen] (cf. Purg. 9.13—18 and 27.92—93). The disaster Dante
predicts is not known (various possibilities have been suggested, but the text
plainly states that when Dante was writing it had not yet taken place).

9. Prato: The reference is uncertain: it may be to the city of Prato, a few miles
from Florence and traditionally under her control, or to Cardinal Niccolo di

Prato, who excommunicated the city in 1304; we prefer the first alternative:
even the traditionally most faithful subject city yearns to see Florence punished,
for Tuscany is not happy.
13-15. We left ... carrying me: In 24.79-80, the pilgrim and Virgil
descended from the bridge to the bank.
19-24. Then I grieved ... deprive myself of it: These lines, explicitly
connecting grief in the moment of writing with the grief experienced in the

406

Notes to Canto 26

journey (clearly penitential in nature in this instance), would seem to indicate a
special relation of the poet to the sin even before it has been identified; the
metaphor of spatial motion in line 22 already implicitly involves Ulysses’ last
voyage, which must have something to do with unrestrained wit.

21. rein in my wit: For the meaning of “wit” (ingegno), see the note to
2.7—8; note the horse metaphor.

23. if a good star or something better: The influence of the stars in Dante’s
nativity, to which Par. 22.112-14 attribute “all my wit ..., whatever it may
be” (see notes there); “or something better” refers to God’s grace.
24. what is good: This phrase (Italian, ’/ bene, literally, the good) cannot refer
to salvation, since salvation is never owed to the stars; it must refer to the faculty
of wit itself, which may be the gift either of nature or, in certain circumstances,

of grace.
25-33. As many fireflies ... depths were revealed: The vivid simile of
the fireflies, implicitly contrasting the peaceful natural scene of dusk in summer
with the intense suffering of the bolgia, creates a sense of distance between the
hillside and the valley, reducing the sinners’ flames to minute proportions. Canto
24 began with an extended winter scene, also involving a peasant.
26. when he who lights the world ... his face: When the sun is most
visible, in the summertime; the first of many references to the sun in this canto.

34-39. And as he who avenged . . rising up: A complex reference to the
account of Elijah (Elias) and Elishah (Eliseus) in 2 Kings [Vulgate 4 Kings]
2.7-14:
... but they two stood by the Jordan. And Elias took his mantle and
folded it together, and struck the waters, and they were divided hither
and thither, and they both passed over on dry ground. And when they
were gone over, Elias said to Eliseus: Ask what thou wilt have me to do
for thee, before I be taken away from thee. And Eliseus said: I beseech
thee that in me may be thy double spirit. And he answered: Thou hast
asked a hard thing: nevertheless if thou see me when I am taken from
thee, thou shalt have what thou hast asked: but if thou see me not, thou

shalt not have it. And as they went on, walking and talking together,
behold a fiery chariot, and fiery horses parted them both asunder: and
Elias went up by a whirlwind into heaven. And Eliseus saw him, and
cried: My father, my father, the chariot of Israel and the driver thereof.
And he saw him no more. . . . And he took up the mantle of Elias, that

fell from him... .

407

Inferno
The episode of the bears is related in the same chapter, verses 23-24:

. . .as he was going up by the way, little boys came out of the city and mocked
him, saying: Go up, thou bald head; go up, thou bald head. And looking
back, he saw them, and he cursed them in the name of the Lord: and there
came forth two bears out of the forest, and tore of them two and forty boys.
Note the motifs important in our canto: fire, whirlwind, horses/vehicle, the

crossing of a body of water, and the question of seeing Elijah in the flames (cf.
Eccles. 48.1: “Elias the prophet stood up as fire, and his word burned like a
torch”). Implicit in Dante’s comparison is the relevance to the context of the
theme of prophecy, including that of the inheritance of the prophet’s mantle
(see Mazzotta 1979). Eliseus/Elishah (Eliseo) was the name of the brother of
Dante’s great-great-grandfather (Par. 15.136, another context involving Dante’s
prophetic mission).
40-42. so each ... a sinner: The basis of the comparison is Elijah’s being
hidden by the flames. The metaphor of theft is discussed, in connection with
line 48; it recurs in 27.127.

43-45. I was standing. . . grasped . . . without being pushed: These lines
are often interpreted as being parallel to lines 21-24 (since “reining in” and
“grasping” involve the hands), and thus as further emphasis on Dante’s sense of
being drawn to this sin.
48. each is swathed ... burns him inwardly: In other words, the flame
that hides each sinner is the externalization of the fire within him: the fire of
intellect, of the malice that motivated his counsels, and of the power of his rhetoric

(called by Alain of Lille, in his Anticlaudianus, “ignis in ore” [fire in the mouth]).
The Italian inceso [fired within] (cf. 22.18) is, like invola [steals away], line 42,
compounded with the preposition “in”; it is derived from Latin incensus, used
repeatedly by Vergil to describe the burning of Troy (Aen. 2.327, 353, 374, 555,
and 764; cf. ardeo, ardere, used of warriors: Aen. 2.316, 475, 529, and 575).

52-54.

who

is in that fire ...

with his brother:

In Statius’s

Thebaid,

Oedipus’s sons, Eteocles and Polynices, kill each other at the main gate of the
city; their mutual hatred divides the fire of their funeral pyre. The clear implication is that Ulysses and Diomedes now hate each other also. Dante introduced
the Theban material in Canto 14, with the figure of Capaneus (lines 46-72);
explicit references to it (as well as to the saga of Troy) become increasingly frequent in Malebolge and Cocytus: 20.31—45 (Amphiaraus, Tiresias) and 52-93
(Manto), 25.97—99 (Cadmus and Harmonia), 30.1-12 (Athamas), 32.10—-12
(Amphion), and 130-32 (Tydeus and Menalippus). In Dante’s adaptation of
Augustine’s paradigm of the City of God versus the Earthly City, Thebes and its
modern figura, Florence, have replaced Rome as exemplars of the strife-ridden

408

Notes to Canto 26

Earthly City (for the foundation of Rome as the preparation of the Incarnation
and the papacy, see 2.13-33).
55-56. There within are punished Ulysses and Diomedes: Ulysses is the
only major Homeric figure who speaks in the Comedy; Dante’s representation
of him is an important focus of his effort to surpass the Aeneid.
56-57. together they go. . . to anger: In other words, being paired intensifies
their punishment, just as they fired each other when they were sinning, and so
incurred God’s anger.
58-63. And within their flame . . . Palladium: Dante has Virgil ascribe three
principal sinful acts to Ulysses and Diomedes (discussed in the next three notes);
he clearly considers that Ulysses was their principal inventor, as in Met. 13.35081. The first and third are based on the Aeneid, the second on Ovid and on Statius’s

Achilleid. Note the insistently parallel syntax of the three independent clauses, each
assigned to one sin, each emphasizing the internal nature of the suffering.
58-60.

And within their flame . . . noble seed: According to Aeneid 2, in

the tenth year of the Trojan War, the Greeks pretend to sail home; they leave
behind the Trojan Horse and Sinon. Sinon pretends to have been marked for
sacrifice (a repetition of the events at Aulis; see the note to 20.110—11) by the
hostility of Ulysses, but to have escaped; gaining the Trojans’ confidence, and
with many oaths to his veracity, he explains (falsely) that the theft of the Palladium (see the note to line 63) had displeased Athena, the horse being an offering
to placate her. He also claims that Calchas has prophesied that if the horse is
taken into Troy, Troy will bring war to Greece. The Trojans enlarge the gates
vertically to admit the horse, filled with Greek soldiers, including Ulysses (medieval tradition, unlike Vergil, placed Diomedes in the horse also). Released by
Sinon, Ulysses and the others open the gates to admit the rest of the Greeks. Vergil’s
account describes the destruction of Troy in terms of the gradual, snakelike spread
offire (see Knox 1950). In addition, the hollow horse is repeatedly described as
a pregnant belly (Aen. 2.38, 51, 238, and 243): a fair exterior, represented as a

religious offering, but pregnant with destruction. See Additional Note 13.
In Vergil’s account, as in Dante’s, the destruction of Troy is, of course, nec-

essary for the founding of the new Troy, Rome, by the descendants of Aeneas
(the noble seed of the Romans, line 60). The Romans eventually do take war to

Greece, which they subjugate. Thus this clause, hinging on the “gate” (porta)
that leads both into the city and out of it, shows the ultimate futility of Ulysses’
and Diomedes’ sin, from which God’s Providence will bring forth good.
61-62. there within . . . grieve for Achilles: In Statius’s version of the Achilles story (Achilleid 1), Achilles’ mother, the sea nymph Thetis, knows of the prophecy that Achilles will die at Troy; she persuades the beardless boy to dress as a
girl and hide among the daughters of King Lycomedes of the island of Scyros;

409

Inferno

Achilles agrees because he has seen the king’s daughter Deidamia, whom he soon
impregnates. Calchas has seen in a trance that Achilles, necessary for the conquest of Troy, is on Scyros, and Ulysses and Diomedes go to recruit him. Posing
as merchants and pretending to be spying on the Trojans, they are entertained
by the king; they soon single Achilles out: their task is to persuade him to drop
his own pretense (still motivated by love for Deidamia). At dinner, Ulysses’ glowing account of the glories of the war visibly affects Achilles, and the next day,
among many harmless gifts for the young women, Ulysses includes a spear and
shield; as Achilles greedily handles them, Ulysses has a trumpet sounded; Achil-

les’ true nature blazes forth: he burns with desire for war. Deidamia’s pregnancy
and the birth of Neoptolemus have so far been concealed; now the baby is brought
forth, the king accepts Achilles, the wedding is celebrated, and the next morning Achilles sails off with Ulysses and Diomedes, never to see Deidamia again
(Purg. 22.114 places her in Limbo). Ulysses’ art makes Deidamia grieve, clearly,
because it led to her husband’s death.
Dante accurately saw that Statius, following suggestions by Ovid in Met.
13.162-70, established a parallel between this stratagem of Ulysses’ and the Trojan
Horse, involving the penetration of defenses and the bringing forth of fire from
where it is hidden. Both Vergil and Ovid represent Ulysses, even more than Achilles, as the principal cause of the fall of Troy. In Met. 13.123—-380, Ovid has Ulysses
claim (nghtly) that at every turning point in the war his counsel led to success; though
he was only one man, he was the Greeks’ steering oar (see the note to lines 85-90).

63. and there . . . Palladium: According to the Aeneid and the Metamorphoses, Ulysses and Diomedes entered Troy at night and by stealth, penetrating as
far as the highest citadel, from which, after killing the guards, they carried off
the statue of Pallas Athena (goddess of wisdom) on whose possession the safety
of Troy was supposed to depend. According to Sinon’s (lying) account in Aeneid
2, this act caused Athena to turn against the Greeks; he reports that when the
statue was set up in the Greek camp, its eyes emitted flames and it brandished its
spear and shield three times, and that from then on the Greeks’ fortunes declined.

Thompson (1972) suggests that Dante follows the later account according to
which Ulysses and Diomedes did not steal the Palladium themselves but counseled the traitor Antenor to do so. In either case, this third sin also involves the
motif of the emergence of hidden fire, as well as the use of stealth; Virgil’s phrasing
here is sufficiently general for the line to refer to Sinon’s deceptive account of
the Palladium as well as to the theft itself.

64-69. If they can speak . . . with desire: The next lines suggest that Virgil
sees in the pilgrim’s words only the laudable desire to hear a great Homeric figure speak. However, one should note the parallel between the pilgrim’s bending
toward the flame with desire and his earlier need to prevent himself from falling.
73-75. Let me speak ... your words: The usual explanation for Virgil’s
idea that Ulysses and Diomedes would be repelled by Dante’s speech is the tra-

410

Notes to Canto 26

ditional attribution of arrogance (including linguistic) to the Greeks. But it is
always Virgil who addresses figures from classical antiquity, not the pilgrim; here
there is a sharp focus on Virgil’s special relation to Ulysses and Diomedes as the
poet of the Aeneid, thus the mediator of Dante’s knowledge. (Vergil’s treatment
of Ulysses and Diomedes in the Aeneid is entirely negative.)
80. if I deserved: An echo of Dido’s words to Aeneas in Aen. 4.317-18: “si
bene quid de te merui, fuit aut tibi quicquam/ dulce meum” [if I have deserved
at all well of you, or anything of mine has ever been sweet to you].
84. let one of you . . . to die: Since Diomedes was supposed to have migrated
to Italy and to have died there, this can only refer to Ulysses; perduto [lost] can
refer to the fact that Ulysses’ fate had been unknown, as well as to his having lost

his way or being damned (cf. the fact that Elijah’s body is not found: 2 Kings
[Vulgate 4 Kings] 2.15—17).

85-90. The greater horn . . . cast out a voice: The emphasis on Ulysses’
struggle to impart to the flame the articulatory motions of a tongue (closely related
to Pier delle Vigne’s struggle to speak, 13.91-92—-including the references to
wind) becomes even greater in the case of Guido da Montefeltro (27.7—18); note
the insistent sound effects involving m: maggior, mormorando; see Met. 14.280-81
(of Circe’s transformation of Ulysses’ men): “nec iam posse loqui, pro verbis
edere raucum/ murmur” [already I could no longer speak, but instead of words
I produce a hoarse murmur]. The idea of the tongue as a flame is fundamental to
the whole episode; a number of commentators have pointed to James 3.3-6:
For we put bits into the mouths of horses, that they may obey us, and we
turn about their whole body. Behold also ships, whereas they are great,
and are driven by strong winds, yet are they turned about with a small
helm, whithersoever the force of the governor willeth. Even so the tongue
is indeed a little member, and boasteth great things. Behold how small a

fire kindleth a great wood. And the tongue is a fire... .
All four major motifs of the canto appear in this passage: tongue, fire, horse, and
ship. For the connection of flame and wind with Pentecost, see Mazzotta 1979.
90-142. When I departed . . . closed over us: Ulysses’ last voyage is discussed in Additional Note 11.
90-93. When I departed ... that name: Dante knew Ovid’s account of
Ulysses’ stay with Circe, put in the mouth of a former follower, Macareus (Met.
14.233—440); line 308 states: “annua nos illic tenuit mora” [a yearlong stay held
us there]. According to both Vergil and Ovid, Aeneas repeats several parts of
Ulysses’ voyage: he encounters the Cyclops, nears Scylla and Charybdis, and sails

411

Inferno

near Circe’s dwelling, near both Cumae (where Aeneas is taken by the Sybil to
the underworld) and the promontory of Gaeta, named by him for his nurse, who
died there. The mention of Aeneas here calls attention to the parallel/contrast
between his voyage and Ulysses’.
97. ardor: Italian ardore [literally, burning]. This is an important instance of the
fire imagery that dominates the canto, and a major interpretive issue is whether
it is to be seen as the same fire that now envelops him and has its origin within
him.

98-99. to gain ... vices and worth: Dante is adapting Horace’s quotation
of the beginning of the Odyssey (Ars poetica 141-42): “virum . . ./ qui mores
hominum multorum vidit et urbes” [the man. . . who saw the customs of many
men, and their cities]. Compare also Epistles 1.2.17—22.
101-2. but I put out . . . deserted: Macareus’s account states that when he
arrived at Circe’s dwelling Ulysses had lost almost all his men and all but one
ship (a principal element of the contrast between Aeneas and Ulysses established
by Vergil is that Aeneas is accompanied by his entire fleet and most of his followers).
103-5. The one shore ... by that sea: In other words, he saw all of the
northern and all of the southern shore of the Mediterranean; the implication is

that he circumnavigated the entire Mediterranean. No cities are mentioned
(though cf. lines 110-11), nor any “human vices and worth.”
107-9. that narrow strait ... not go further: The Straits of Gibraltar.
The tradition that Hercules set pillars there (the two opposing mountains) is
ancient, as is the tradition that they were a prohibition, which appears, for
instance, in Pindar’s Fourth Nemean

Ode

(Kay 1980; Boitani

1992). See

Additional Note 11.

110-11. on the right . . . Ceuta: Seville is on the south shore of Spain, just
east of Gibraltar; Ceuta is at the tip of the African promontory opposite Gibraltar.
The passage derives from Ovid’s description of Daedalus’s and Icarus’s flight (Met.
8.220—25):
... et 1am Iunonia laeva
parte Samos—fuerant Delosque Parosque relictae—
dextra Lebinthos erat fecundaque melle Calymne:
cum puer audaci coepit gaudere volatu
deseruitque ducem caelique cupidine tractus
altius egit iter. ...

412

Notes to Canto 26

[. . . and already on the left
hand was Juno’s Samos—they had left Delos and Paros behind—
and on the right Lebynthos and Calymne rich with honey:
when the boy began to delight in the audacious flight
and abandoned his guide and, drawn by greed for the sky,
flew higher. . . .]
Audac . . . volatu [in audacious flight] lies behind Dante’s folle volo (line 125).
112-20. O brothers . . . virtue and knowledge: Ulysses’ “little oration” is
clearly crucial to Dante’s conception, but critics are sharply divided between those
who accept Ulysses’ characterization of the voyage—that it is a pursuit of the
noble goals of virtue and knowledge (here critics divide further into those who
applaud the pursuit and those who identify Ulysses’ quite generic terms with
some particular philosophical school or position Dante is rejecting: variously
Neoplatonism, “humanism,” and radical Aristotelianism)—and those who regard

it as fraudulent, arguing that no wisdom, no knowledge of men is to be had in
the “world without people,” citing Seneca’s Epistle 88, in terms of which Dante’s

Ulysses would have to be seen as abandoning his duties. One may reflect that
Ulysses travels only on the surface of the globe, while the pilgrim goes through
the center, always in contact with human souls.
113.

the west: Dante’s term is l’occidente, still close to its Latin meaning, “set-

ting of the sun.”
117. following the sun: Toward its setting.
118. Consider your sowing: That is, your descent as human beings; compare “the Romans’ noble seed” (line 60).
121. sharp: There is a strong suggestion of fire imagery here; in the wake of
Plato’s Timaeus 56, fire was often identified as sharp (hence its destructiveness).
124. turning our stern toward the morning: Since the ship must be turned,
its direction has not been determined until this point: they could have turned
east rather than west. Iconographically, of course, the east is the direction from
which illumination comes.

125. of our oars . . . flight: Many commentators have noticed the parallel of
the phrase folle volo [mad flight] with the pilgrim’s fear of avenuta . . . folle [mad
journey] in 2.35 (also with Par. 27.82—83: “il varco folle d’Ulisse” [the mad path
of Ulysses]). Dante is adapting a line of Vergil’s describing Daedalus’s flight from
Crete to Italy (Aen. 6.18—19): “sacravit/ remigium alarum” [he consecrated the
oars of his wings]. Modern scholars (Freccero 1966a; Shankland 1977) connect
the reference to wings (and the reference to Daedalus) with Neoplatonic allego-

413

Inferno

ries of the ascent of the soul. Shankland discusses Dante’s conception of the significance of his family name, Alager [wing-bearer], as one of the reasons for the
importance of the Ulysses antitype.
126. always gaining on the left side: Why this should be the case is not
explained, but in medieval symbolic terms it is a very bad sign, no doubt to be
connected with the pilgrim’s dragging left foot (1.30) and the fact that Virgil
and the pilgrim usually turn to the left in Hell, to the right in Purgatory. Of
course, a southwest course is necessary if Ulysses and his men are to approach
the only island Dante places in the hemisphere of water, at the antipodes ofJerusalem.
127-29. All the stars ... floor of the sea: They have passed the equator.
130-32. Five times . . . deep pass: Five months have elapsed. Commentators have pointed out that there are no references to the light of the sun after
line 124, as if the voyage were taking place entirely at night.

132. the deep pass: Dante has associated the term pass with damnation since
the beginning of the poem (“the pass that has never yet left anyone alive,”
1.26—27, would seem to be the one where Ulysses perishes; cf. 5.114); the phrase
l’alto passo [the deep pass] occurs verbatim in 2.12, referring to the pilgrim’s
journey to the other world.
133-35. a mountain ... I had seen: This is, as we learn in the Purgatorio,
the mountain at whose summit is the Garden of Eden, forbidden to man (Gen.
3.24); it also recalls the mountain of Canto 1.

136. We rejoiced . . . weeping: The line echoes James 4.9.
138.

the forequarter of the ship: The Italian, “del legno il primo canto,”

puns on canto; in the first canto of the poem the pilgrim was metaphorically
shipwrecked, too.

140-41.
124.

stern aloft

... prow . . . down: Note the progression from line

141.

another: God.

142.

until the sea had closed over us: Lines 58-60, on the Trojan Horse,

draw a parallel between its penetration of the gate of Troy and the escape of
Aeneas and his followers; they also establish a parallel between the Trojan Horse
and Aeneas’s ship: one moves inward, the other outward; one carries the seeds
of destruction, the other the seeds of Rome; as Clausen (1987) points out, several of Vergil’s terms for the horse are borrowed from shipbuilding. This paral-

414

Notes to Canto 26

lel mediates a further one, fundamental to the canto, between the Trojan Horse

and Ulysses’ ship: both carry Greeks; both carry Ulysses and his fiery speech;
one moves inward, the other outward; and both cause death.

In the sins listed in lines 58-63, Ulysses’ characteristic activity has been that
of imparting the fire within himself to others, for the sake of the destruction of
Troy (cf. James 3.5: “Behold how small a flame sets fire to a great forest”). Ulysses’
going out through the Pillars—the gate—of Hercules, to him a violent act, because forbidden, is a kind of inversion of the violent entrance of the Trojan Horse

into Troy, and also, in its results, a negative parallel to Aeneas’s passage out the
gate of Troy. Thus when the waters close around Ulysses there is a kind of implosion: the fire that he has loosed upon the world returns upon him, first in the
form of water, then in the fire of the Malebolge. This is perhaps Dante’s most
elaborate version of the idea that the devices of the fraudulent are the snares that
catch and punish them.

415

Gia era dritta in su la fiamma e queta
per non dir piu, e gia da noi sen gia
con la licenza del dolce poeta,

quand’ un/altra, che dietro a lei venia,

ne fece volger li occhi a la sua cima
per un confuso suon che fuor n’uscia.
Come ’| bue cicilian, che mugghio prima
col pianto di colui—e cio fu dritto—
che l’avea temperato con sua lima,
10

mugghiava con la voce de l’afflitto,
si che, con tutto che fosse di rame,

is

16

19

pur el pareva del dolor trafitto:
cosi, per non aver via né forame
dal principio nel foco, in suo linguaggio
si convertian le parole grame.
Ma poscia ch’ebber colto lor viaggio
su per la punta, dandole quel guizzo
che dato avea la lingua in lor passaggio,
udimmo dire: “O tu a cw’ io drizzo
la voce e che parlavi mo lombardo,
dicendo: ‘Istra ten va, piu non t’adizzo,’

22

perch’ io sia giunto forse alquanto tardo,
non t’incresca restare a parlar meco;
vedi che non incresce a me, e ardo!

25

Se tu pur mo in questo mondo cieco
caduto se’ di quella dolce terra
latina ond’ io mia colpa tutta reco,

28

dimmi se Romagnuoli han pace o guerra;
ch’io fui d’i monti la intra Orbino
e ’l giogo di che Tever si diserra.”
416

GRIN LO. 27,
Eighth bolgia, continued: Guido da Montefeltro, converted, but tricked
by Pope Boniface VIII—dispute of Saint Francis and the black cherub

Already the flame was erect and quiet, no longer
speaking, and already it had left us with the
permission of my sweet poet,
when another, coming after it, made us turn our

eyes to its peak because of a confused sound coming
out from it.
As the Sicilian bull, which first bellowed with the

cries of him—and that was right—who had
tempered it with his file,
10

13

16

19

ee

2D

28

used to bellow with the voice of the afflicted one,

so that, though made of brass, still it seemed
transfixed with pain:
so, not having any path or outlet from its origin
within the fire, the anguished words were converted
into its language.
But after they had found their way up to the tip,
imparting to it that wriggling which the tongue had
given them in their passage,
we heard it say: “O you to whom I direct my
voice and who were just now speaking Lombard,
saying: ‘Istra you may go, I incite you no further,’
though I have arrived perhaps somewhat late, let
it not grieve you to stay and speak with me; you
see it does not grieve me, and I am burning!
If you just now fell into this blind world from that
sweet Italian earth whence I bring all my guilt,
tell me if the people of Romagna have peace or
war; for I was from the mountains there between

Urbino and the ridge whence Tiber is unleashed.”

417

Inferno
x

31

34

Io era in giuso ancora attento e chino,

quando il mio duca mi tento di costa,
dicendo: “Parla tu: questi é latino.”
E io, ch’avea gia pronta la risposta,
sanza indugio a parlare incominciai:
“O anima che se’ 1a git: nascosta,

2y/

40

43

46

49

Romagna tua non é, e non fu mai,

sanza guerra ne’ cuor de’ suoi tiranni;
ma ’n palese nessuna or vi lasciai.
Ravenna sta come stata é molt’anni:
Yaguglia da Polenta la si cova,
si che Cervia ricuopre co’ suoi vanni.
La terra che fé gia la lunga prova
e di Franceschi sanguinoso mucchio,
sotto le branche verdi si ritrova.
E ’] mastin vecchio e 7] nuovo da Verrucchio,

che fecer di Montagna il mal governo,
la dove soglion fan d’i denti succhio.
Le citta di Lamone e di Santerno
conduce il lioncel dal nido bianco,

52

55

58

61

64

che muta parte da la state al verno.
E quella cu’ il Savio bagna il fianco,
cosi com’ ella sie’ tra ’] piano e ’] monte,
tra tirannia si vive e stato franco.
Ora chi se’, ti priego che ne conte:
non esser duro piu ch’altri sia stato,
se ’l nome tuo nel mondo tegna fronte.”
Poscia che ’] foco alquanto ebbe rugghiato
al modo suo, l’aguta punta mosse
di qua, di la, e poi dié cotal fiato:
“S’1’ credesse che mia risposta fosse
a persona che mai tornasse al mondo,
questa fiamma staria sanza piu scosse;
ma pero che gia mai di questo fondo
non torno vivo alcun, s’i’ odo il vero,

67

sanza tema d’infamia ti rispondo.
Io fui uom d’arme, e poi fui cordigliero,
credendomi, si cinto, fare ammenda;
e certo il creder mio venia intero,
418

Canto 27

31

I was still bent over intent upon him when my
leader prodded my side, saying, “You speak: this one
is Italian.”

34

And I, having my reply already prepared, without
delay began to speak: “O soul hidden down there,
your Romagna is not, and never was, without war
in the hearts of its tyrants; but no open war did I
leave there now.
Ravenna is as it has been for many years: the
eagle of Polenta broods over it, covering Cervia with
its pinions.
The city that underwent the long trial and made a
bloody heap of the French, now finds itself beneath
the green claws.
The old and young mastiffs of Verrucchio, who
guarded Montagna ill, as they are accustomed, make drills
of their teeth.
The cities of Lamone and Santerno are led by the
lion cub in the white nest, who changes alliances
between summer and winter.
And the city whose flank the Savio bathes, just as
it lies between the plain and the mountain, so lives
between tyranny and liberty.
Now who you are | beg you to tell us: do not be
harder than others have been to you, so may your
name hold up its brow in the world.”

oH

40

43

46

49

52

55

58

After the flame had roared a bit in its manner, it

61

moved its sharp tongue here and there, and then
gave forth this breath:
“If I believed that my reply were to a person who
would ever return to the world, this flame would
remain without further shaking;

64

but since never from this depth has any one
returned alive, if I hear the truth, without fear of

infamy I answer you.
67

I was a man of arms, and then I was a Franciscan,

believing, so girt, to make amends; and surely my
belief would have been fulfilled,

419

Inferno
x

70

13:

76

79

82

se non fosse il gran prete, a cui mal prenda!
che mi rimise ne le prime colpe;
e come e qua re, voglio che m’intenda.
Mentre ch’io forma fui d’ossa e di polpe
che la madre mi dié, l’opere mie
non furon leonine, ma di volpe.
Li accorgimenti e le coperte vie
10 seppi tutte, e si menai lor arte
ch’al fine de la terra il suono uscie.
Quando mi vidi giunto in quella parte
di mia etade ove ciascun dovrebbe
calar le vele e raccoglier le sarte,
cid che pria mi piacéa allor m’increbbe,
€ pentuto e confesso mi rendei;

85

88

ahi miser lasso! e giovato sarebbe.
Lo principe d’1 novi Farisei,
avendo guerra presso a Laterano—
e non con Saracin né con Giudei—
ché ciascun suo nimico era cristiano,

e nessun era stato a vincer Acri
né mercatante in terra di Soldano—,
91

94

97

né sommo officio né ordini sacri
guardo in sé, né in me quel capestro
che solea fare i suoi cinti piu macri.
Ma, come Costantin chiese Silvestro

d’entro Siratti a guerir de la lebbre,
cosi mi chiese questi per maestro
a guerir de la sua superba febbre;
domandommi

100

103

106

consiglio, e io tacetti,

perché le sue parole parver ebbre.
E’ poi ridisse: “Tuo cuor non sospetti:
finor t’assolvo, e tu m’insegna fare
si come Penestrino in terra getti.
Lo ciel poss’ io serrare e diserrare,
come tu sai; pero son due le chiavi
che ’] mio antecessor non ebbe care.’
Allor mi pinser li argomenti gravi
la ’ve ’] tacer mi fu avviso ’] peggio,
e dissi: ‘Padre, da che tu mi lavi
420

Canto 27

70

73

76

79

82

85
88

had it not been for the high priest, may evil take
him! who put me back into my first sins; and how
and qua re, | wish you to hear from me.
While I was the form of bone and flesh that my
mother gave me, my works were not those of a lion
but a fox.
The tricks and the hidden ways, I knew them all,
and I so plied their art that the fame of it went out
to the ends of the earth.
When I saw I had reached that part of my life
where every man should lower the sails and coil the ropes,
what earlier pleased me, then grieved me, and I
gave myself up repentant and shriven; ah,
miserable wretch that I am! and it would have worked.
The prince of the new Pharisees, making war near
the Lateran, and not against Saracens or Jews,
for each of his enemies was a Christian, and none

had been to take Acre nor a merchant in the Sultan’s
lands—,
91

regarded neither his highest office nor holy orders in
himself, nor in me the rope that used to make its

94
Oil

wearers thinner.
But, as Constantine asked Sylvester in Soracte to
cure him of leprosy, so he asked me to teach him
to recover from his proud fever; he asked my
advice, and I was silent, for his words seemed

100

drunken.
Then he said again: ‘Let not your heart fear:
henceforth I absolve you, if you teach me how to
raze Palestrina to the ground.

103

Heaven I can lock and unlock, as you know; for

106

that reason the keys are two which my predecessor
did not prize.’
Then his weighty arguments impelled me, for
silence seemed to me the worse course, and I said:

‘Father, since you wash me

421

Inferno

109

di quel peccato ov’ io mo cader deggio,
lunga promessa con I’attender corto

ti fara triunfar ne l’alto seggio.’
112

Francesco venne poi, com’ io fu’ morto,
per me; ma un d’i neri cherubini

115

118

121

124

127

li disse: ‘Non portar, non mi far torto.
Venir se ne dee giti tra’ miei meschini,
perché diede ’] consiglio frodolente,
dal quale in qua stato li sono a’ crini;
ch’assolver non si puo chi non si pente,
né pentere e volere insieme puossi,
per la contradizion, che nol consente.’
Oh me dolente! come mi riscossi
quando mi prese, dicendomi: ‘Forse
tu non pensavi ch’io l6dico fossi!’
A Minos mi porto; e quelli attorse
otto volte la coda al dosso duro,
e poi che per gran rabbia la si morse,
disse: ‘Questi é d’i rei del foco furo.’
Per ch’io la dove vedi son perduto,
e€ si vestito, andando, mi rancuro.”

130

133

Quand’ elli ebbe ’] suo dir cosi compiuto,
la fiamma dolorando si partio,
torcendo e dibattendo ’] corno aguto.
Noi passamm’ oltre, e io e ’] duca mio,
su per lo scoglio infino in su l’altr’ arco,

136

che cuopre ’I fosso in che si paga il fio
a quei che scommettendo acquistan carco.

422

Canto 27

109

ti

of that sin into which I now must fall, a long
promise with a short keeping will make you triumph
on your high throne.’
Francis came later, when I had died, for me; but
one of the black cherubim told him: ‘Do not take him,

ALS

do not wrong me.
He must come down among my slaves, because
he gave the fraudulent counsel, since when, until
now, I have been at his locks;

118

121

for he cannot be absolved who does not repent,
nor can one repent and will together, because of the
contradiction, which does not permit it.’
Oh wretched me! how I trembled when he seized
me, telling me: ‘Perhaps you did not think I was a
logician!’

124

He carried me to Minos; and that one twisted his

127

tail eight times about his hard back, and after he had
bitten it in his great rage,
he said: “This is one who deserves the thieving
fire’; so that I am lost here where you see me, and

130

133

136

thus clothed I go tormenting myself.”
When it had finished speaking thus, the grieving
flame departed, twisting and beating about with its
sharp horn.
We passed further, both I and my leader, up along
the ridge as far as the next arch, which covers the
ditch where the toll is collected
from those who gain cargo by putting apart.

Ng

"423

NOTES

3. with the permission of my sweet poet: Indicating Virgil’s control of
Ulysses (see 26.73—75, with note); now Virgil’s speech is the point of contact
with the next soul to address the pilgrim.
5. made us turn our eyes to its peak: Dante again focuses attention on the
point of the flame (cf. 26.68 and lines 17, 59, and 132). The idea of the tongue

as goad, as in Ulysses’ use of it, is implicit (see lines 61-62 and 132).
7-15. As the Sicilian bull ... into its language: Dante found in various
sources (Ovid’s Art of Love 1.655—-56; Orosius’s Seven Books against the Pagans
1.20. 1-4) the account of how the sculptor Perillus made for Phalaris, tyrant of

Syracuse, a brazen bull designed to roast criminals to death, muffling their screams
so that they sounded like the bellowing of a bull; Phalaris tested the bull on Perillus,
himself. The explicit relevance of the simile is to correlate the soul within the
flame with the victim within the bull, thus explaining the “confused sound”;

but the soul within must be its fashioner: this is the same pattern pointed out in
the note to 26.142, by which Ulysses’ and Diomedes’ devices return upon them,

clear instances of “the trickster tricked.” The bull is also a work of art that
maliciously deceives, closely related to the “false cow” constructed by Daedalus
for Pasiphaé (see 12.12—-13, and Purg. 26.41—42) and the Trojan Horse (see
Additional Note 13).

8. and that was right: See Ovid, Art of Love 1.655—56: “Iustus uterque fuit:
neque enim lex aequior ulla est,/ quam necis artifices arte perire sua” [Both were
just: nor is any law more just than for the artificers of death to perish by their
own art].

9. tempered it with his file: As commentators point out, a bronze statue was
sometimes filed smooth; since Horace’s Ars poetica (line 291), the “labor of the

file” (limae labor) has been proverbial for the labor whereby the poet polishes his
verses.
10. used to bellow: Dante’s verb is mugghiare, used also in 5.29, of the whirl-

wind. Reference to confusion continues the motif of Hell as Babel (see 31.78)
and is relevant to the emphasis on discourse in this canto. See also lines 58 and
132 and note.

13-18. not having any path . . . in their passage: This soul finds it even
more difficult to speak from within the flame than Ulysses (see 26.85—90, with
note); at first all that is heard is the fire (“its language”). Eventually the “tip” of
the flame acquires the motion of the tip of the tongue.

424

Notes to Canto 27

20-21. just now speaking Lombard, saying ‘Istra . . .: Istra, here identified as Lombard, is the equivalent ofissa, identified in 23.7 as identical in meaning with mo, an important word in this canto (both mean “now”); Virgil was
identified by his speech as a Lombard in 22.99 also. The possibility of different
“containers” having identical contents is to be correlated with that of identical
containers having different contents (the condition which makes fraud possible).
See Additional Note 13.
22. somewhat late: Tardo [late] is the same term Ulysses the character uses of
himself and his companions to mean “slow” (26.106).
27. whence I bring all my guilt: Connecting the speaker with his native
land prepares the correlation in lines 40-55 of his biography with the geography of Romagna.

28-30.

tell me

... unleashed: The speaker’s birthplace (along with his

description of his career, line 78) identifies him as Guido da Montefeltro, the

most successful mercenary captain of his day; he maintained the Ghibelline
hegemony in Romagna during a period when the Guelfs were in the ascendant
throughout Italy. In 1293 he became duke of Urbino. Reconciled with the
Church, he entered the Franciscan house at Assisi in 1296 and died there in 1298.

28. if the people of Romagna have peace or war: Like others of the damned
(see 10.97-105), Guido has no knowledge of the present, which included the
peace of 1299 between Guelf and Ghibelline factions in Romagna. In 1298, when
Guido died, the peace was still being negotiated.

33. You speak: this one is Italian: See 26.73—75, where Virgil speaks with
the Greeks Ulysses and Diomedes.
36-54.

O soul... tyranny and liberty: Dante has the pilgrim give an account

of seven cities in Romagna, including the coats of arms, each showing a beast of

prey, of the ruling families.

36-39. Osoul... did I leave there now: The lines correlate the “hidden”
Guido with the violence hidden in the hearts of Romagna’s rulers.
38. tyrants: “Tyrant” is used here in a broad sense for the emerging signori or
“princes” of northern and central Italy, whose rule was based on arbitrary seizure rather than law or tradition (see 12.104). Technically, a tyrant was “one
who rules a commonwealth unlawfully” (Gregory the Great); Dante, following
Aristotle, writes that tyrants “do not follow laws for the common good, but
attempt to twist them to their own benefit” (Monarchia 3.4; see also Convivio

4.6.27). The list of tyrants here is bracketed at the extremes of the canto by the
classical Phalaris and the tyrannical Pope Boniface.

425

Inferno

40-42. Ravenna .. . pinions: Ravenna had been under the lordship of the
Guelf Guido Vecchio da Polenta, Francesca’s father, since 1275; his device was

a red eagle ina field of gold, hence the pinion extending as far as Cervia, “covering” it with its power. In 1283 Guido da Montefeltro lost Cervia, precious for
its salt marshes, to the Polentas: the first of his defeats in the area.

43-45. The city . . . claws: Forli, once the Ghibelline stronghold of Romagna.
During the siege of the city in 1283 by a Guelf army sent by Pope Martin IV,
Guido led a sortie that massacred the French knights under the count of Romagna
(“a bloody heap”). Forli passed under the control of the Ordelaffi in 1296; on
their shield was the upper half of a green lion: the green claws would have been
prominent.
46-48. The old . . . of their teeth: The mastiff was found on the escutcheon
of a lateral branch of the Malatesta family; Dante refers to the “old mastiff”

Malatesta il Vecchio (1212-1312) and his son Malatestino, who drove the
Ghibellines from Rimini in 1295 and governed with notorious cruelty.
Verrucchio was an ancestral castle of the Malatesta.

47. guarded Montagna ill: Montagna de’ Parcitati, head of the Ghibelline
resistance to the Malatesta in Rimini, was captured and murdered in prison by
Malatestino in 1296, when, according to one story, Malatestino finally understood his father’s repeated hint that the prisoner was “not well guarded.”

48. make drills of their teeth: Dante refers to the doglike Malatestas using
their fangs as drills to pierce the flesh and bone and suck blood and marrow from
their subjects. Allied with the Polentas (Gianciotto Malatesta was the husband
of Francesca da Polenta, Paolo Malatesta her lover; see 5.116 and note), the

Malatestas were Guido’s most dangerous adversaries; he had to defend Urbino
against Malatestino, podesta of Cesena in the 1290s, several times.

49-51. Lamone . . . winter: Faenza and Imola are identified by the rivers
flowing near them; these cities were frequently in and out of the hands of
Maghinardo de’ Pagani (see the note to lines 50-51).
50-51. lion cub .. . summer and winter: A blue lion in a white field was
the device of the Pagani, whose head, Maghinardo, was notorious for fighting
as a Ghibelline in Romagna, north of the Apennine chain, but as a Guelf south
of it, in Tuscany (Villani, Chronicle 7.49): according to the early commentators,
“summer” means the southern side of the mountains, “winter” the northern.
52-54. the city . . . between tyranny and liberty: Cesena, the seventh city,
was under the nominal lordship of Guido’s nephew Galasso da Montefeltro in
1300 but enjoyed the privileges of a free republic. The geographical position of
the city between plain and slope indicates its political condition.

426

Notes to Canto 27

57. so may your name hold up its brow: Guido’s name—his reputation—
is here personified, as if it were the man himself; there may be implicit contrast
with the animal symbolism of the tyrants (but see line 75).
61-129. If Ibelieved . . . tormenting myself: In most of what remains of
the canto, Guido responds to the pilgrim. After Guido’s initial summary of his
destiny (58-72), a rapid summary of his life (73-84) precedes the climactic scene
with Boniface VIII (85-111): Boniface is introduced (85-93); then Guido relates
the fatal interview (94-111); finally, Guido describes his damnation (112-29).

61-66. If I believed . .. I answer you: In answer to the pilgrim’s promise
of fame, Guido reveals his fear of infamy: he would say nothing more if he thought
the pilgrim would return to earth, since he wishes to keep his reputation of having
died repentant (which Dante had originally accepted; see the note to lines 79-81).
Just as Guido in life gullibly believed an exaggerated promise, so here he has
gullibly accepted the devil’s word (cf. the inscription on the gate, 3.9). The lines
are the epigraph to T. S. Eliot’s epochal “Love Song of J. Alfred Prufrock.”
67-72. I was . . . I wish you to hear: These lines introduce topics that recur
in Guido’s discourse: his fame as a soldier and strategist, which gains him
Boniface’s attention (67, also 78); his entry into the Franciscan order, dividing
his life into “before” and “after” (67, also 83); and his reproaching the pope for
derailing his amendment of life (70—71, also 84 and 91), typically couched in
contrary-to-fact constructions (70, also 84 and 122-23; this construction also

begins his speech, lines 61—66).
72. qua re: Literally, “on account of what thing.” The Latin phrase, part of the
scholastic formulary for logical investigation (quod, quomodo, quare: what, how,
why?), balances the Lombardism of line 6.
73. the form of bone and flesh that my mother gave me: The “form” is
the soul, the vital principle, which shapes the “bone and flesh.”
74-75.

my works were not those of a lion but a fox: The works of the

fox are fraud, rather than open violence, the work of the lion (see 11.22—24: the

two modes of ingiuria). Corrupt Franciscans were often depicted as vulpine in
anticlerical literature and its illustrations (Romance of the Rose); the fox had the
reputation of turning back to his old sins, as in the Roman de Renard (Mazzotta
1993):
78. the fame of it went out to the ends of the earth: As Mattalia notes,
Guido is never named: his fame identifies him. See Psalm 18.5, “Their sound
hath gone forth into all the earth,” and 26.2-3. The irony of Guido’s “hidden

ways” becoming “famous” permeates the canto.

“427

Inferno

79-81. When I saw . . . ropes: The metaphor of the voyage of life implicitly
involves Ulysses, whose last journey is the antithesis of Guido’s retirement (until
the pope intervenes). See Convivio 4.28.8:
O miserable and vile, you that run toward this port [death] with sails aloft,
and because of the driving force of the wind are shattered where you should
find rest, you yourselves losing what you had traveled so far to obtain.
Surely the knight Lancelot did not wish to enter port with raised sails, nor
did our own most noble Latin knight Guido of Montefeltro. These noblemen did well to furl the sails of earthly activity: in their old age they surrendered to religion, setting aside all worldly pleasures and works.
For the parallels between Guido and Ulysses, see Ryan 1977.
85-93. The prince of the new Pharisees . .. the rope: Guido refers to
Pope Boniface VIII, also unnamed, but reproached for being an arch-hypocrite
(for the frequent denunciations of the Pharisees in the Gospels, see the note to
23.64—65 and cf. Additional Note 9), for fighting against Christians, rather than
the enemies of Christendom (87—90), and for failing to respect both his own
high office and priestly vocation and Guido’s vows as a Franciscan.
86. war near the Lateran: That is, near Rome; Saint John in Lateran was the
cathedral of Rome, the pope’s see as bishop.

87-90. against Saracens or Jews ... in the Sultan’s lands: Targets for
justifiable action on Boniface’s part, in Dante’s view, were the Muslims, who

regained Saint-Jean-d’Acre, the last Christian stronghold in the Holy Land, in
1291; the Jews, traditionally regarded as enemies of Christ (see Paradiso 7); and
merchants who continued trading with Muslims despite the ban of the Church.
94. as Constantine asked Sylvester: For this legend, see the note to
19.115-17. The simile puts Guido in the role of the pope and the pope in the
role of the emperor seeking a cure; the reversal echoes the pilgrim’s relation to
Pope Nicholas III (see 19.46—51 and note); the relationship of Phalaris and Perillus
(lines 7-12) also anticipates that of Boniface and Guido: “For just as the astute
Perillus taught the astute Phalaris how to punish his enemies in a novel manner,
so this clever count [Guido] taught the clever Boniface, who was a great tyrant
among priests, how to use a novel piece of advice to eliminate his enemies”
(Benvenuto).
97. his proud fever: Penance, including contrition, confession, absolution,

and satisfaction, is preeminently the “medicinal” or “healing” sacrament (Aquinas,
Summa theol. 3a, q. 84, a. 5), but that is not Boniface’s concern.

101. henceforth I absolve you: The formula is that of absolution (“ego te
absolvo”), but the language is ambiguous since “finor t’assolvo” might mean “I

428

Notes to Canto 27

absolve you as ofnow” or “until now.” For the flaws in this absolution, see lines
110-11, with note; for the emphasis on the present (“now”), see line 119 and

note.
102. how to raze Palestrina: Palestrina (ancient Praeneste, twenty miles east
of Rome, visible from Boniface’s home town, Anagni), was a stronghold of the

Colonna, the family that stood in the way of Boniface’s attempts to restore the
Angevins to power in Sicily and to aggrandize his patrimony in central Italy (see
19.52-57, with note). In 1297 the Colonna infuriated Boniface by stealing a
large sum of money from him; he retaliated by laying siege to Palestrina. The
city surrendered in 1298 on the promise of amnesty; lives were spared, but the
citadel was razed (Villani, Chronicle 8.23). The razing of Palestrina, in a sense

Guido’s final military exploit, is also the symbol of his own undoing; he died in
the same month and the same year. Kay (1980) points out the parallel between
the fall of Palestrina and that of Troy in Canto 26.
103-4: Heaven ... the keys are two: Boniface, invoking the tradition of
the keys (Matt. 16.19; see 13.58-61 and 19.91—92, with notes), implies that one

key binds, the other releases. This is not Dante’s view. According to Aquinas
and other authorities, one key represents the discretion (scientia) of the confessor, the other the power of imposing penance or releasing from it (Summa theol.
Suppl., q. 17, a. 3) (see Purg. 9.117—29, with notes).
104. the keys are two... did not prize: According to contemporary accusations (repeated by Nicholas; see 19.56), Celestine V abdicated under pressure
from Boniface: another boast, and a veiled threat, in the pope’s words.
106. his weighty arguments impelled me: Boniface’s mention of the keys
(line 105) threatens damnation. Guido thinks his dilemma is between jeopardizing his salvation by giving sinful advice, and causing Boniface to use the keys
to bar him from Heaven. But the “power of the keys” cannot bind the will: just
as absolution works only if the sinner is penitent, the key cannot impose guilt
but only temporal punishment (see Aquinas, Summa theol. Suppl., q. 18, a. 6).
Boniface could not have kept a penitent Guido from salvation, but only (perhaps) increased his stay in Purgatory (see Purg. 3.133—41).

108-9. since you wash me .. . I now must fall: Echoes the “penitential”
Psalm 50.4: “wash me yet more from my iniquity.” Guido seizes the offer of
absolution (line 101): but since this is before the fact, it cannot remit sin; note
the emphasis on “now” (mo) (see the notes to lines 20-21 and 119).
110-11. along promise . . . your high throne: The chronicle of Riccobaldo
da Ferrara (as early as 1308, possibly before Dante’s composition of this episode)
preserves Guido’s advice in language almost identical to Dante’s: “Boniface said:
‘only tell me how I can make them submit.’ So Guido said: ‘promise much,

429

Inferno

keep little of what you promise’” (Parodi 1920). Riccobaldo’s account may have
altered the view Dante took in Convivio 4.28.8 (see the note to lines 79-81). In
believing Boniface, Guido himself is accepting a “long promise” that will have
a “short fulfillment”; he is caught in his own trick. Note the symmetry between
Boniface’s short fulfillment and the long fulfillment of God’s promise, on which
the pilgrim is relying (cf. the note to lines 61—66).
112. Francis came later, when I had died: The jump to Guido’s death mimics the suddenness of death and judgment (see the note to line 119). The motif of
the dispute between devil and angel for the soul at death was common in medieval art; there is one instance in the Inferno, one in the Purgatorio (5.100—108).
113. black cherubim: In Christian angelology, the cherubim—the Hebrew
means “fullness of knowledge”—were the second highest order of angels.
116. the fraudulent counsel: These words, spoken by the devil, are the only
description of the sin punished in this bolgia; on their basis, this sin, not mentioned in Virgil’s list (11.5860), is commonly termed “false counsel,” though
some readers claim it is rather cunning (astuzia) that is targeted (Kay 1980; Ahern
1982). Astuzia would seem common to fraud in general, however, and it is clear

also that fraudulent advice is involved in many other sins, such as pandering (cf.
18.55—57), simony (cf. 19.70—72), or sowing discord (cf. 28.106—11). What distinguishes Ulysses and Guido from the practitioners of fraud in other bolge would
seem rather to be the use (and counseling the use) of fraud in war; the next bolgia
punishes those who counsel resorting to violence.

119. nor can one repent and will together: The “contradiction” that snags
Guido is the impossibility of making two contradictory choices in the same instant:
in the “now” that separates “before” and “after.” The text repeatedly hints at this
contradiction by mentioning the present moment, the “now” (istra, finor, or, mo,
and gid; see lines 1-2, 20, 25, 39, 101, 109, and 117), and also harps on the “before” and “after” of Guido’s spiritual life (lines 67, 82, 101, 108-9, and 117). Note

also the frequency in the canto of words involving the sound m, particularly in
Guido’s speech, but beginning with mugghio, line 7: they radiate from the mo of
line 109 and the morto of line 112. See Augustine’s discussion of the instant of “now”

as the temporal analogue of eternity (Confessions 11.15—31; see Masciandaro 1970).

123. you did not think I was a logician: Devils cannot philosophize, because
they cannot love wisdom, but they can use dialectic and apply the law of contradiction, a basic axiom of Aristotle’s logic (see Summa theol. 1a, q. 58, a. 3).
129. thus clothed I go tormenting myself: The last reference to concealment (see lines 7-15, 36-39, 61—66, and 76, with notes). See Luke 12.2: “for
there is nothing covered, that shall not be revealed: nor hidden, that shall not be

known.” Guido is still confused (cf. line 6).

430

Notes to Canto 27

131. the grieving flame departed, twisting and beating about with its
sharp horn: See Wisdom 11.17: “that they might know that by what things a
man sinneth, by the same also he is tormented” (Latin torquetur, twisted, tortured). In Canto 28, Dante makes explicit the notion of contrapasso [countersuffering] as a principle of justice in Hell. The contortions of the flame mirror
those of Guido’s thought; “beating about” translates dibattendo, which can mean
“debating.”
136. those who gain cargo by putting apart: That is, gain the burden of
guilt by setting others at odds: those who counsel violence, the sowers of discord.

431

CANTO

10

28

Chi poria mai pur con parole sciolte
dicer del sangue e de le piaghe a pieno
ch’i’ ora vidi, per narrar pit volte?
Ogne lingua per certo verria meno
per lo nostro sermone e per la mente,
c’hanno a tanto comprender poco seno.
S’el s’aunasse ancor tutta la gente
che gia, in su la fortunata terra
di Puglia, fu del suo sangue dolente
per li Troiani e per la lunga guerra
che de I’anella fé si alte spoglie,
come Livio scrive, che non erra,

13

16

con quella che sentio di colpi doglie
per contastare a Ruberto Guiscardo,
e l’altra il cui ossame ancor s’accoglie
a Ceperan, 1a dove fu bugiardo

ciascun Pugliese, e la da Tagliacozzo,
dove sanz’ arme vinse il vecchio Alardo,
19

22

e qual forato suo membro e qual mozzo
mostrasse, d’aequar sarebbe nulla
il modo de la nona bolgia sozzo.
Gia veggia, per mezzul perdere o lulla,
com’ io vidi un, cosi non si pertugia,

25

28

rotto dal mento infin dove si trulla.
Tra le gambe pendevan le minugia;
la corata pareva e ’] tristo sacco
che merda fa di quel che si trangugia.
Mentre che tutto in lui veder m’attacco,

guardommi e con le man s’aperse il petto,
dicendo: “Or vedi com’ io mi dilacco!

432

CANTO

28

Ninth bolgia: sowers of discord—Mohammed—Curio—Mosca de’
Lamberti—Bertran de Born

Who could ever, even with unbound words, tell in

10

full of the blood and wounds that I now saw, though
he should narrate them many times?
Every tongue would surely fail, because our
language and our memory have little capacity to
comprehend so much.
If one gathered together all the people who ever,
on the travailed earth of Apulia, groaning poured
forth their blood
on account of the Trojans, and in the long war
that took such heaped spoils of rings, as Livy writes,
who does not err,

13

16

19

22

25

28

and the people who suffered wounds when
resisting Robert Guiscard, and the others whose
bones are still being collected
at Ceperano, where every Apulian was a liar, and
at Tagliacozzo, where old Elard won without arms,
and this one showed his perforated, this one his
truncated member, it would be nothing to equal the
wretched mode of the ninth pocket.
Surely a barrel, losing centerpiece or half-moon, is
not so broken as one I saw torn open from the chin
to the farting-place.
Between his legs dangled his intestines; the pluck
was visible, and the wretched bag that makes shit
of what is swallowed.
While I was all absorbed in the sight of him, he,
gazing back at me, with his hands opened up his
breast, saying: “Now see how I spread myself!

433

Inferno

31

34

37

40

43

46

Vedi come storpiato € Maometto!
Dinanzi a me sen va piangendo Ali,
fesso nel volto dal mento al ciuffetto.
E tutti li altri che tu vedi qui,
seminator di scandalo e di scisma
fuor vivi, e pero son fessi cosi.
Un diavolo é qua dietro che'n’accisma
si crudelmente, al taglio de la spada
rimettendo ciascun di questa risma
quand’ avem volta la dolente strada,
pero che le ferite son richiuse
prima ch’altri dinanzi li rivada.
Ma tu chi se’ che ’n su lo scoglio muse,
forse per indugiar d’ire a la pena
ch’é giudicata in su le tue accuse?”
“Né morte ’] giunse ancor, né colpa ’] mena,”
rispuose ’] mio maestro, “a tormentarlo;

ma per dar lui esperienza piena,
49

a me, che morto son, convien menarlo
per lo ’nferno qua git di giro in giro;
e quest’ é ver cosi com’ io ti parlo.”

3

Piu fuor di cento che, quando l’udiro,

55

s’arrestaron nel fosso a riguardarmi
per maraviglia, obliando il martiro.
“Or dia fra Dolcin dunque che s’armi,

58

s’ello non vuol qui tosto seguitarmi,
si di vivanda che stretta di neve

tu che forse vedra’ il sole in breve,

non rechi la vittoria al Noarese,
61

64

ch’altrimenti acquistar non saria leve.”
Poi che l’un pieé per girsene sospese,
Maometto mi disse esta parola;
indi a partirsi in terra lo distese.
Un altro, che forato avea la gola
e tronco ’] naso infin sotto le ciglia,
e€ non avea mai ch’una orecchia sola,

67

ristato a riguardar per maraviglia

con li altri, innanzi a l’altri apri la canna,
ch’era di fuor d’ogne parte vermiglia,

434

Canto 28

Hil

34

37

40

See how Mohammed is torn open! Ahead of me
Ali goes weeping, his face cloven from chin to
forelock.
And all the others you see here were sowers of
scandal and schism while they were alive, and
therefore are they cloven in this way.
There is a devil back there who carves us so
cruelly, putting the edge of his sword to each in this
ream
once we have circled through the suffering road,
for the wounds have closed before any confronts him
again.

43

46

But who are you sniffing at us from up on the
ridge, perhaps to delay going to the punishment
decreed on your crimes?”
“Death has not reached him yet, nor does guilt
lead him,” replied my master, “into torment; but so

that he may have full experience,

49

I, who am dead, must lead him through Hell

down here from circle to circle; and this is as true as
sy

55

that I am speaking to you.”
More than a hundred were they who, hearing
him, stopped in the ditch to gaze up at me in
amazement, forgetting their suffering.
“Now then, you who will perhaps shortly see the
sun, tell Brother Dolcino, if he does not want to
follow me soon down here,

58

61

to provide himself with enough food that the
barrier of snow may give not the victory to the
Novarese, which otherwise would not be easy to
acquire.”
Holding one foot lifted to walk away, Mohammed

spoke this word to me; then, departing, he set it
64

67

down.
Another, whose throat was bored through, his
nose cut up to his eyebrows, and with only one ear,
stopping to gaze up at me in amazement with the
others, first of the others opened his windpipe, which
was all covered with crimson,
435

Inferno

70

e disse: “O tu cui colpa non condanna
e cu’ io vidi in su terra latina,

se troppa simiglianza non m’inganna,
7S

76

rimembriti di Pier da Medicina,

se mai torni a veder lo dolce piano
che da Vercelli a Marcabo dichina.
E fa sapere a’ due miglior da Fano,
a messer Guido e anco ad Angiolello,
che, se l’antiveder qui non é vano,

19

82

85

88

91

gittati saran fuor di lor vasello
€ mazzerati presso a la Cattolica
per tradimento d’un tiranno fello.
Tra lisola di Cipri e di Maiolica
non vide mai si gran fallo Nettuno,
non da pirate, non da gente argolica.
Quel traditor che vede pur con I’uno,
e tien la terra che tale qui meco
vorrebbe di vedere essser digiuno,
fara venirli a parlamento seco;
poi fara si ch’al vento di Focara
non sara lor mestier voto né preco.”
E io a lui: “Dimostrami e dichiara,
se vuo’ ch’i’ porti su di te novella,

94

oi

chi é colui de la veduta amara.”
Allor puose la mano a la mascella
d’un suo compagno e la bocca li aperse,
gridando: “Questi é desso, e non favella.
Questi, scacciato, il dubitar sommerse

in Cesare, affermando che ’] fornito
100

sempre con danno I’attender sofferse.”
Oh quanto mi pareva sbigottito
con la lingua tagliata ne la strozza
Curio, ch’a dir fu cosi ardito!

103

E un ch’avea I’una e I’altra man mozza,

levando i moncherin per |’aura fosca,
si che ’] sangue facea la faccia sozza,
106

grido: “Ricordera’ti anche del Mosca,
che disse, lasso! “Capo ha cosa fatta,’

che fu mal seme per la gente tosca.”
436

Canto 28

70

and said: “O you whom guilt does not condemn,

and whom I saw in Italy, if too close a resemblance
does not deceive me,
13

remember Pier of Medicina, if you ever return to
see the lovely plain sloping down from Vercelli to
Marcabo.

76

And tell the two best men of Fano, messer Guido

79

82

85

88

91

94

97

100
103

and Angiolello, that, if foresight is not empty here,
they will be thrown from their vessel in a
weighted sack and drowned near Cattolica, thanks to
the treachery of a wicked tyrant.
Between the islands of Cyprus and Maiolica
Neptune has never seen so great a sin done, not by
pirates, not by Argolians.
That traitor who sees with only one eye, who
holds the city that my fellow wishes he had still to
see;
will have them come to parley; he will bring it
about that they need no vows or prayers against the
Focara wind.”
And I to him: “Show me and explain, if you wish
me to carry news back up about you, who is the one
of the bitter sight?”
Then he put his hand to the jaw of one of his
companions and opened his mouth for him, crying:
“This is he, and he cannot speak.
He, an exile, drowned Caesar’s doubts, affirming

that one prepared always suffers from delay.”
Oh how dismayed Curio seemed, with the tongue
cut out of his throat, he who was so bold to speak!
And one who had both hands cut off, lifting the
stumps in the murky air so that the blood soiled his
face,

106

cried: “You will remember Mosca, too, who said,
alas, ‘A thing done is done,’ the seed of evil for the
Tuscans.”

wre

Inferno

109

E io li aggiunsi: “E morte di tua schiatta.”
Per ch’elli, accumulando duol con duolo,

112

115

118

121

sen gio come persona trista e matta.
Ma io rimasi a riguardar lo stuolo,
e vidi cosa ch’io avrei paura,
sanza piu prova, di contarla solo,
se non che coscienza m/’assicura,
la buona compagnia che l’uom francheggia
sotto l’asbergo del sentirsi pura.
Io vidi certo, e ancor par ch’io ’| veggia,
un busto sanza capo andar si come
andavan li altri de la trista greggia;
e ’l capo tronco tenea per le chiome,
‘pesol con mano a guisa di lanterna;
e quel mirava noi, e dicea: “Oh me!”

124

Di sé facea a sé stesso lucerna,
ed eran due in uno e uno in due;

127

130

133

136

139

142

com’ esser puo, quei sa che si governa.
Quando diritto al pié del ponte fue,
levo ’] braccio alto con tutta la testa
per appressarne le parole sue,
che fuoro: “Or vedi la pena molesta,
tu che, spirando, vai veggendo i morti:
vedi s’alcuna é grande come questa.
E perché tu di me novella porti,
sappi ch’i’ son Bertram dal Bornio, quelli
che diedi al re giovane i ma’ conforti.
Io feci il padre e ’1 figlio in sé ribelli:
Achitofél non fé piu d’Absalone
e di David coi malvagi punzelli.
Perch’ io parti’ cosi giunte persone,
partito porto il mio cerebro, lasso!
dal suo principio ch’é in questo troncone.
Cosi s’osserva in me lo contrapasso.”

438

Canto 28

109

tl2

And I added: “And the death of your clan”; so that
he, piling grief on grief, walked off like a person mad
with sorrow.
But I remained to gaze at the host, and I saw
something that I would fear, without more proof,
even to retell,

115

118

except that my conscience makes me confident,
the good companion that frees a man, if it wears the
hauberk of knowing itself pure.
I surely saw, and it seems I still see, a torso

without a head walking like the others of the sorry
flock;
121

124

and his severed head he was holding up by the
hair, dangling it from his hand like a lantern; and the
head was gazing at us, saying: “Oh me!”
Of himself he made a lamp for himself, and they
were two in one and one in two; how that can be, he

127

knows who so disposes.
When he was directly at the foot of the bridge, he
raised his arm far up, head and all, to bring his
words close to us,

130

155

136

139

which were: “Now see my wretched punishment,
you who go still breathing to view the dead: see if
any is great as this.
And that you may take back news of me, know
that I am Bertran de Born, he who gave the young
king the bad encouragements.
I made father and son revolt against each other:
Achitophel did no worse to Absalom and David with
his evil proddings.
Because I divided persons so joined, I carry my
brain divided, alas, from its origin which is in this

142

trunk.
Thus you observe in me the counter-suffering.”

Oe
439

NOTES

1-6. Who could ever ... comprehend so much: Even if freed of the
restrictions imposed by verse, the poet could not adequately contain in words
(line 6) the scene he saw. This is the so-called inexpressibility topos (see Curtius
1953), based on such passages as Aen. 2. 361-62:
Quis cladem illius noctis, quis funera fando

explicet aut possit lacrimis aequare labores?
[Who by speaking could unfold the slaughter of that night
and its deaths, or equal its travails with his tears?]
and 6.625—27:

Non, mihi si linguae centum sint oraque centum,
ferrea vox, omnis scelerum comprendere formas,
omnia poenarum percurrere nomina possim.

[Not if I had a hundred tongues and mouths,
a voice of iron, could I include all the forms of crime,

run through the names of all the punishments. ]
Compare Statius, Theb. 12.797—99, which lists victims of the fratricidal Theban
war.

1. unbound words: Prose (Latin oratio soluta, unbound speech) as opposed to
verse, regulated by fixed numbers and rules; in the De vulgari eloquentia (2.5 and
2.8) Dante compared the lines of verse in a stanza to sticks of fixed length bound
together in a bundle.
7-21. If one gathered .. . the ninth pocket: The multitude of “blood and
wounds” in this bolgia exceeds the number of all those wounded and killed in
the many wars fought in the south of Italy from Roman times until the battle of
Tagliacozzo (1268). The rhetorical organization of these lines may be derived
from the lament for the “young king” (Henry Plantagenet, second son of Henry
II of England) attributed to Bertran de Born, lines 1-5:

Si tuit li dol el plor el marrimen
e las dolors el dan el caitivier
que hom anc auzis en est segle dolen
fosson ensems, sembleran tot leugier
contra la mort del joven rei engles.

440

Notes to Canto 28

[If all the pain and weeping and dismay
and anguish and harm and misery
that man ever had in this life of pain
were all together, they would seem light
next to the death of the young English king.]
Bertran himself appears in lines 118-42.
8. travailed earth of Apulia: Apulia refers here to the medieval kingdom of
Naples, stretching from the “heel” and “toe” of Italy as far north as the Tronto
and Garigliano rivers (near modern Ascoli and Gaeta).
10. Trojans: Of all the wars between the Trojans (the Romans, the descendants of Aeneas and his followers) and the Latin tribes for control over the Italian peninsula, one of the bloodiest was the Samnite War (280 B.c.), which in-

volved the Greek mercenary Pyrrhus (see 12.135).

10-12. the long war . . . Livy writes: The second Punic, or Carthaginian,
War (218-202 B.c.). The victory of Hannibal at Cannae (216 B.c.) marked

Rome’s darkest hour in its long struggle with Carthage for domination of the
Mediterranean. According to Livy (Ab urbe condita 22.44), Hannibal’s soldiers
gleaned a bushel of rings from the corpses of the Roman dead; Orosius and
Augustine give the amount as three bushels.
14. Robert Guiscard: Born in Normandy in 1015, brother ofits duke, Rob-

ert Guiscard (the surname means “sagacious” or “cunning”’) was in 1059 offered
Apulia and Calabria by Pope Nicholas II; he fought for twenty years to conquer
them. He died suddenly of pestilence in July 1085. (Subsequently the titles of
Apulia and Sicily were united in the person of his great-nephew, Roger I, first
of the Norman kings of the Two Sicilies.)
16. at Ceperano

...

was a liar: Frederick II’s natural son, Manfred, was

defeated at Benevento in 1266 by Charles of Anjou, engaged by the pope to
establish Guelf supremacy in central and southern Italy. According to Dante’s
information, the battle was lost because of the desertion of the Apulian barons,
who failed to hold positions near the pass of Ceperano, on the Liris river; Manfred
was killed on the field (see Purg. 3.112 and notes).
17. Tagliacozzo . . . without arms: After Manfred’s defeat, the Ghibelline
cause was championed by Frederick’s legitimate grandson Conradino, defeated
by Charles of Anjou at Tagliacozzo, in the rugged Abbruzzi region northeast of Naples. The battle was very bloody, but Conradino was tricked by the
French general Elard de Valéry, who thus won “without arms”—that is, by

tactics.

441°

Inferno

22-63. Surely a barrel . . . he set it down: The interview with Mohammed
is the longest in the canto. Dante accepted the medieval Christian claim that
Mohammed had originally been a Christian; he treats him as a schismatic.

22-24. Surely a barrel ... to the farting-place: Note the image of the
broken container. In this canto, Dante repeatedly echoes the famous poet of the
joy of battle, Bertran de Born. Compare Bertran’s “Bem plai lo gais temps de
pascor” [Well-pleased I am by gay Eastertime], on bodies and fortifications cleft
and riven: “qan vei fortz chastels assetgatz/ els barris rotz et esfondratz” [when
I see strong castles besieged and the outer walls broken and breached]. Bertran’s
language itself echoes the formulas for the savage wounds sustained in shock
combat found in the Old French chansons de geste (Bertran 1986), especially the
Song ofRoland, which Dante probably read in thirteenth-century rhymed Venetian versions.

25-27. Between his legs ... what is swallowed: The “pluck” (corata) is
the lungs, heart, and other organs above the diaphragm; the “bag” is usually taken
to mean the stomach. Mahomet’s pendant intestines are suggestive of the
Malebolge itself. See Additional Note 13.

29-31. with his hands ... torn open: Italian dilaccare [to spread] was idiomatically used for the spreading of the thighs (cf. lacca [hollow, slope]; 7.16 and
12.11). This display of wounds parodies the iconography of Christ’s wounds at
the Last Judgment. Note the parallel between the gaping physical wounds and
the gaping and staring of both the pilgrim and the punished schismatics (see lines
53-54 and 29.1-3).
31. Mohammed:

In the Christian polemics that were Dante’s sources of

information, Mohammed

was said to have been a Nestorian Christian (the

Nestorians denied that Christ’s divine and human natures were united) before
founding Islam; thus he was thought both a heretic and a schismatic, having drawn
one third of the world’s believers away from the true faith.

32-33. Ali... his face cloven from chin to forelock: Ali was Mohammed’s
cousin and son-in-law. His wound suggests completion of the splitting of the
body begun with the vertical slash on Mohammed; it may conceivably refer to
the splitting of Islam into Sunnites and Shiites.

35. sowers of scandal and schism: Scandal (Greek skdndalon, stumblingblock) trips others into sin (Aquinas, Summa theol. 2a 2ae, q. 5, a. 2; and see
Augustine, City of God 20.5); schism, according to Aquinas, is the division (scissura)
of the faithful by those professing to be believers. The metaphor of sowing derives

442

Notes to Canto 28

from the parable of the tares in Matt. 13.24-30, 36-43 (see also lines 68, 94,
101, and 108). For the distinction between heresy and schism, see the note to

9.127—28. For the close relation between the metaphors of the body of Christ
and the body politic, see Additional Note 2.
37. carves us: Dante’s word accismar meant literally “to prepare” or “to equip”;
he knew it in Bertran’s “Be.m plai” (26-28): “And once the battle is joined,/
each must be prepared [acesmatz]/ to follow his lord willingly.”
38-39. putting the edge . . . in this ream: Italian faglio means literally “cutting” or “slicing.” Compare with Bertran, “Un sirventes,” line 40: “‘sabra de
mon bran cum talha” [they shall know how my sword can cut] and line 43: “Tot
jorn resoli e retaill/ los baros” [All day I resole and reslice the barons]. In this
canto where Dante makes explicit a theory of retributive punishment (see line
142), it is logical that the agent of justice (here, a devil) bear a sword: images
closely contemporary with Dante (Giotto, Ambrogio Lorenzetti) show the sword
as the instrument of justice. Pietro di Dante comments: “as they divided others
with the word, here they themselves are now divided.”

39. in this ream: A ream is a quantity of cut paper; Dante’s word risma derives
perhaps from rame, a brass device for cutting paper; risma is also a variant of rima
[rhyme or verse], from Latin rithimus, associated with Gallo-Romance rimar [to
put in a row; rive, split]. See Additional Note 12.

44. perhaps to delay ... on your crimes: With increasing frequency in
lower Hell, the pilgrim is assumed to be one of the damned. For this emphasis
on the decree of punishment, see line 142, with note.

55-60. Now then, you ... would not be easy: The charismatic Dolcino
de’ Tornielli, from near Novara, became the leader of the “Apostolic Brethren”
after Gherardo Segarelli, their founder, was burned at the stake (1300). In 1305

Clement V ordered a crusade, recruited mainly from Novara (line 59) and
Vercelli; from camps high in the mountains, the Brethren resisted until starva-

tion forced them to a pitched battle in March 1307. Dolcino and his companion, Margaret of Trent, were captured; Dolcino’s body was cruelly mutilated
before he was burned at the stake at Vercelli in June 1307.
Although the Apostolic Brethren were branded as heretics by the Church,
Dante places them among the schismatics; he seems to have shared most of
Dolcino’s doctrines in some form (Dolcino condemned the papacy and preached
renewal of the Church under an emperor and a saintly pope). Apparently Dante
condemns Dolcino and has him advised by Mohammed because of his leading a

separate group, which makes him a schismatic, and his armed resistance to the

443

Inferno

crusaders. Eco (1980, trans. 1983) imaginatively evokes the period; Orioli (1988)
offers a recent sifting of the evidence.
55-58. Now... with enough food: Because of Dante’s use of inversion and
hypallage (suspended constructions), these lines have had to be rearranged; the
original order is: “Now tell Brother Dolcino that he arm himself, you who . .
if... , with enough. . . .” Two clauses stand between s’armi, “provide [literally,
arm] himself” in line 55 and vivanda [food] in line 58.
61-63. Holding one foot . . . set it down: Again a gap in what is normally
unified (see lines 55—58): walking has been suspended, like the constructions of
lines 55-58; compare Aen. 6.546—47: “I, decus, i, nostrum; melioribus utere

fatis./Tantum effatus, et in verbo vestigia torsit.” [Go, our glory, go: know better
fates. This much said, while speaking he turned his steps.]
64-66.

Another, whose throat ... only one ear: The mutilation of Pier

da Medicina recalls that of Deiphobus; see Aen. 6.494—97:
Atque hic Priamiden laniatum corpore toto
Deiphobum vidit, lacerum crudeliter ora,

ora manusque ambas, populataque tempora raptis
auribus et truncas inhonesto vulnere naris.

[But here, with his whole body torn, he saw Priam’s son
Deiphobus, and his cruelly lacerated face,

his lips and both his hands, his ears shorn
from his ravaged temples and his nose cut short with shameful wounds.]

(Having married Helen after the death of Paris, Deiphobus was betrayed by her
and caught unarmed when Troy fell.)
68. opened his windpipe: Like Pier della Vigna, this soul speaks through his
wound; the focus is on the act of speech as causing strife (see lines 35, 94, and
107, with notes).
73. remember Pier of Medicina: Piero di Aimo da Medicina is the leading
candidate among several like-named members, about whom little is known, of
the house of Medicina, a large village between Imola and Bologna. Benvenuto
states that he sowed discord between the Malatesta and Polenta families (see 27.41,
46) by telling each inflammatory stories about the other.
74-75. the lovely plain . . . Marcabo: This plain is the entire valley of the
Po, from Vercelli in the west to near Ravenna.

444

Notes to Canto 28

79-80. thrown... and drowned: Italian mazzerare is derived from mazzera
[bundle of stones attached to fishing nets]; compare Matt. 18.6: “it were better
for him [whoever scandalizes the innocent] that a millstone should be hanged
about his neck, and that he should be drowned in the depth of the sea.”

80. Cattolica: Site of a lighthouse overlooking the stretch of the seacoast of
the March of Ancona where Guido del Cassero and Angiolello da Carignano,
high-ranking nobles of Fano, were drowned.

82-84. Between the islands . . . not by Argolians: The islands of Cyprus
in the eastern and Majorca in the western Mediterranean were well known to
Florentines, who kept trading offices in both places. For “Argolians” meaning
“Greeks,” see Sinon’s words in Aen. 2.78: “neque me Argolica de gente negabo”
[nor do I deny that I am of the Argolian people], and see 30.98-129, with notes.
Note the repeated geographic panoramas.
85. That traitor . . . only one eye: Malatestino’s face, slashed by a sword cut
and lacking one eye, seems to hint of future damnation to this bolgia. Christian
accounts had it that Mohammed’s face was also scarred by sword cuts.
86-87.

the city . . . still to see: Rimini (see the note to line 99).

89-90. he will bring it about . . . against the Focara wind: The currents
and winds near Cattolica were dangerous, hence prayers were often made for
protection against the wind from Focara. Guido and Angiolello will need no
prayers because they will be drowned.

93. the one of the bitter sight: The one mentioned in line 87.

94-95. he put his hand .. . opened his mouth: The gesture emphasizes
speech as the source of discord (see lines 35 and 68, with notes). Curio was

known for his venality and his glib tongue (lines 100-101); see Pharsalia 1.269:
“Audax venali. . . Curio lingua” [Curio, bold with his venal tongue]. Piero’s
sarcasm echoes Lucan’s moralizing over Curio’s death (4.801—4): “quid prodita
iura senatus/ et gener atque socer bello concurrere iussi?” [what good came to
him from betraying the Senate’s laws and sending Pompey and Caesar to clash
in arms?].
97. an exile: Like Caesar, once having defied the Senate Curio was an exile

(Pharsalia 1.278-79); technically this did not occur until Caesar had crossed the
Rubicon.

445

Inferno

99. one prepared always suffers from delay: The words Curio spoke to
persuade Caesar to cross the Rubicon at Rimini and thus begin the civil war is
one of the most famous sententiae, or sayings, from Lucan’s poem, often quoted
in the Middle Ages (Pharsalia 1.280—81): “‘tolle moras; semper nocuit diferre
paratis” [do not delay: waiting always harms those who are ready] (see Dante,
Epistle 7.5).
103. both hands cut off: Mutilation of the “executive” limbs of the body. In
the Song of Roland, Roland is the “right arm” of Charlemagne, “le destre braz
del cors” (laisse 45.2), a traditional relation between soldier and captain. The

mutilated hands here balance the awkward walking of lines 61—63, coordinating the extremities.
106. Mosca: Mosca is the last of the five Florentines mentioned by the pilgrim
to Ciacco (6.79-80) as having bent themselves to “well-doing”; he was of the

Ghibelline Lamberti family, allied to the more powerful Amidei. Villani tells of
how Buondelmonte de’ Buondelmonti, betrothed to one of the Amidei, rejected

her when offered a more appealing candidate; the Amidei, with the Lamberti
and other families, urged by Mosca, decided on revenge. On Easter Sunday, 1215,
Buondelmonte was dragged from his horse and stabbed to death next to the statue
of Mars at the head of the Ponte Vecchio (see 13.143—51). The old chroniclers
see this murder as the origin of the division of the city into Guelf and Ghibelline
factions, the “beginning ofits destruction.”
107. A thing done is done: Literally, “a thing done has a head” (a cap, or
conclusion); in short, kill him (Dino Compagni, Cronica 1.2.20).
108.

the seed of evil for the Tuscans: Mosca’s words, rather than ending

the problem, unleashed violence: the capo was not an end of shame, but a beginning of division. For words as seeds, see lines 35, 68, 94, and 101.

109. And the death of your clan: The pilgrim caps Mosca’s advice, and
invokes the end, the cap, put on his kindred. In fact, the influence of the Lamberti
soon waned; in 1258 they were expelled from Florence for violence.

112-42. But I remained ... the counter-suffering: The last example of
the sowing of strife is Bertran de Born, allusions to whose poetry have provided
a kind of subtext for the canto; after the interview with Mohammed, this is the

longest in the bolgia, and it provides a particularly striking conclusion.
113-17. I saw ... knowing itself pure: Again, the poet’s proof is that
he “saw it”; he bears witness (see lines 1-6, 51, 71-72, and the notes to

16.124—29). Otfried Lieberknecht, in an Internet posting, cites 2 Cor. 1.12.

446

Notes to Canto 28

117. the hauberk of knowing itself pure: It is the conscience that knows
itself pure—that is, blameless. Dante is adapting Saint Paul’s “breastplate of justice” (Eph. 6.14) to the terminology of medieval weapons (chain mail) (cf. Saint
Paul’s source, Is. 59.17).

119-26. a torso ... who so disposes: Like Mohammed’s exposure of his
wounds, Bertran’s holding his own head parodies a type of Christian martyr:
the cephalophore, who when decapitated picks up his own head and walks to
his burial place (e.g., San Miniato, whose church sits above Florence; see Purg.

12.102).
121-22. holding . . . like a lantern: In classical epic, the severed head held
aloft is a gesture of triumph (see Aen. 9.466; Statius, Theb. 9.132 and 10.452;
and, of course, Perseus holding the head of Medusa).

123. Oh me: In the Italian, a rare example of rima franta, one rhyme combining two words; Dante may be imitating Bertran, who uses one in “Be.m plai”
(quoted in the note to line 37): “to eat, drink, or sleep is not so savory as the
moment I hear both sides crying ‘at ’em’ [a lor].”” See Additional Note 12. For
another, see 7.28: pur li, rhymed with urli and burli.
125.

two in one and one in two: See 25.61 and note.

128-29.

he raised . .. close to us: Bertran’s head is both a lantern (it sees)

and a vocal conduit. A literal instance of “broken speech,” since Bertran’s breath

is separated from its source in the lungs. For the eye as a lantern, see Matt. 6.23:
“if thy eye be evil, thy whole body shall be darksome”; compare Matt. 5.29-30,
on amputating members that “scandalize” one (eye and hand).
130-32. Now see ... if any is great as this: See Lam. 1.12: “O all ye that
pass by the way, attend, and see if there be any sorrow like to my sorrow.” The
words are spoken by the personified city of Jerusalem (see the note to 30.58-61).
131. you who go still breathing: Dante again reminds us that the pilgrim is
breathing; breath is the physical image of the spirit that unifies the body. Breathing, the pilgrim distinguishes himself from the sowers of discord, who rend the
unity of personal, civic, and mystical bodies.
134. Bertran

de Born: Born about 1140, Bertran was lord of Hautefort, a

castle in the Périgord whose ownership he disputed with his brother, whom he
displaced (according to one of his biographies, through treachery). He died about
1215, a monk at the Cistercian monastery of Dalon, near Hautefort. Dante drew
his information regarding Bertran’s life and politics from the often fictionalized

447

Inferno

biographies, or vidas, of the troubadours composed in Italy in the thirteenth
century. In the De vulgari eloquentia (2.2.9), Dante calls Bertran the preeminent
poet of arms in Provencal.
135. the young king: The second son of Henry II of England (1155-1183;
his older brother died at age two). He was called the young king because Henry
II had him crowned in 1170 and again in 1172. Young Henry’s mother, Eleanor
of Aquitaine, and the French king, Louis VII, backed his demand that a sub-

stantial part of his patrimony be turned over to him. The resultant conflict among
the young king, his father, and his brothers Richard and John lasted until the
young king’s death in 1183. His death was much lamented, perhaps less on
account of his virtues than his prodigal, indeed ruinous, liberality. Some commentators have confused him with Henry II’s grandson, Henry III (r. 1216-1272).
136. I made father ... each other: One of the Provengal lives of Bertran
reads:

Always he wished them to have war with each other, the father and the
son and the brother, each with the other . . . and if they made peace or
called a truce, then he strove to pummel them with his satires so that they

would undo the peace. (Hill and Bergin)
137-38.

Achitophel . . . his evil proddings: Achitophel, counselor to King

David and his son Absalom, fostered the son’s sedition against his father; it

resulted in Absalom’s death (2 Samuel [Vulgate 2 Kings] 15.7—18.15). In the
Latin chronicle by William of Newburgh (1170-1220), young Henry is called
“the undutiful Absalom” (2.27). The tongue serves as goad again (see the note
to.2 20):

142. the counter-suffering: “Counter-suffering” translates the Latin
contrapassum, a rendition of the Greek to antipeponthén in Aristotle’s Nicomachean
Ethics 5.5.1132b, part of a discussion of retaliation as a form of justice. Aquinas
uses the term for the biblical law of retribution (lex talionis): Summa theol. 2a 2ae,
q. 61, a. 4: “I answer that counter-suffering [contrapassum] denotes equal suffering repaid for previous action .. . this kind of justice is laid down in the Law
(Ex. 21.23, 24): ‘He shall render life for life, eye for eye.’” See also Deut. 19.21,
Lev. 24.20, and Matt. 5.38, 7.2.

Cleft horizontally, Bertran at the end of the canto balances the vertically cleft
Ali (son-in-law, head) and Mohammed (father, body) at the beginning; there is
a “harmony” of cuts and slashes, of religious schism paired with secular.

The souls in this bolgia suffer punishments that correspond to the effects their
sins have had on the body politic; thus they are figures of the body politic individually as well as collectively. This is made explicit by Bertran de Born when
he says that his decapitation is the contrapasso for having sown discord between
father and son; he speaks of his trunk as the “origin” of his head. This unex-

448

Notes to Canto 28

pected phrase calls attention to the special complexity of both his sin and its
punishment. Henry II was both the father, the origin, of the young king and
the head of the state and the family; his son was part of the body that should
have been subject to Henry II, but also the future head of the state; Bertran’s

encouragements caused the young king to rebel, thus making illegitimate
“head” against his father and ultimately aborting his rightful reign. In parting
“persons so joined,” Bertran doubly sinned against both the head and the trunk
of the body politic.

449

CANTO

29

La molta gente e le diverse piaghe
avean le luci mie si inebriate
che de lo stare a piangere eran vaghe.
Ma Virgilio mi disse: “Che pur guate?
perché la vista tua pur si soffolge
la giu tra l’ombre triste smozzicate?
Tu non hai fatto si a l’altre bolge;
pensa, se tu annoverar le credi,
10

13

16

che miglia ventidue la valle volge.
E gia la luna é sotto i nostri piedi;
lo tempo € poco omai che n’é concesso,
e altro é da veder che tu non vedi.”
“Se tu avessi,” rispuos’ 10 appresso,
“atteso a la cagion per ch’io guardava,
forse m’avresti ancor lo star dimesso.”
Parte sen giva, e io retro li andava,

lo duca, gia faccendo la risposta,
19

22

e soggiugnendo: “Dentro a quella cava
dov’ io tenea or li occhi si a posta,
credo ch’un spirto del mio sangue pianga
la colpa che 1a git cotanto costa.”
Allor disse ’] maestro: “Non si franga
lo tuo pensier da qui innanzi sovr’ello.
Attendi ad altro, ed ei la si rimanga;

25

ch’io vidi lui a pié del ponticello
mostrarti e minacciar forte col dito,

28

e udi’ ’] nominar Geri del Bello.
Tu eri allor si del tutto impedito
sovra colui che gia tenne Altaforte,
che non guardasti in 1a, si fu partito.”

450

CANTO

29

Ninth bolgia, continued: Virgil’s rebuke—Geri del Bello—
tenth bolgia, falsifiers: alchemists: the Aretine—vanity of the
Sienese—Capocchio

The multitude of people and their strange wounds
had so inebriated my eyes that they longed to stay
and weep.
But Virgil said to me: “Why do you still stare? Why
does your sight still dwell on those wretched
mutilated shades down there?
You did not act thus at the other pockets; think, if

you believe you could number them, that the valley
turns for twenty-two miles.
10

And already the moon is beneath our feet; little
remains of the time granted us, and there are other

things to see that you do not see.”
Ne:

16

19

Pape

25

28

“If you had attended,” I then answered him, “to

the cause for which I was staring, perhaps you would
have permitted me to stay longer.”
Meanwhile my leader walked on, with me behind
him already replying, and adding: “Within that
hollow
where just now I was fixing my eyes, I think a
spirit of my blood is weeping for the guilt that costs
so much down there.”
Then said my master: “Let not your thought break
over him from now on. Attend to other things, and
let him stay there;
for I saw him at the foot of the bridge, pointing at
you and threatening fiercely with his finger, and I
heard him called Geri del Bello.
You were then so caught by him who held
Hautefort that you did not look there, and he went

off.”
451

Inferno

Sil

“O duca mio, la violenta morte
che non li é vendicata ancor,”’ diss’ io,

34

OY

40

43

46

49

52

55

58

61

64

67

“per alcun che de |’onta sia consorte,
fece lui disdegnoso; ond’ el sen gio
sanza parlarmi, si com’ io estimo,
e in cid mvha el fatto a sé pit pio.”
Cosi parlammo infino al loco primo
che de lo scoglio l’altra valle mostra,
se piu lume vi fosse, tutto ad imo.
Quando noi fummo sor l’ultima chiostra
di Malebolge, si che i suoi conversi
potean parere a la veduta nostra,
lamenti saettaron me diversi
che di pieta ferrati avean li strali;
ond’ io li orecchi con le man copersi.
Qual dolor fora, se de li spedali

di Valdichiana tra ’] luglio e ’] settembre,
e di Maremma e di Sardigna, i mali
fossero in una fossa tutti ’nsembre:
tal era quivi, e tal puzzo n’usciva
qual suol venir de le marcite membre.
Noi discendemmo in su l’ultima riva
del lungo scoglio, pur da man sinistra;
e allor fu la mia vista pit viva
giu ver’ lo fondo, 1a ’ve la ministra
de l’alto Sire infallibil giustizia
punisce 1 falsador che qui registra.
Non credo ch’a veder maggior tristizia
fosse in Egina il popol tutto infermo,
quando fu l’aere si pien di malizia
che li animali, infino al picciol vermo,
cascaron tutti—e poi le genti antiche,
secondo che i poeti hanno per fermo,
si ristorar di seme di formiche—
ch’era a veder per quella oscura valle
languir li spirti per diverse biche.
Qual sovra ’] ventre e qual sovra le spalle
l'un de l’altro giacea, e qual carpone
si trasmutava per lo tristo calle.
452

Canto 29

31

“O my leader, his violent death, as yet
unavenged,” I said, “by anyone who shares the shame
of it,

34

37

40

43

46

has made him full of scorn; therefore he walked

away without speaking to me, as I judge, and that
has made me more compassionate toward him.”
Thus we talked as far as the first place on the
ridge to show the next valley, if there were more
light there, down to its bed.
When we were above the last cloister of
Malebolge, so that its converts could appear to our
sight,
strange lamentings struck me, arrows whose iron
heads were made of pity, so that I covered my ears
with my hands.
What the suffering would be, if the sick from the
hospitals of Valdichiana between July and September,
and from Maremma and Sardinia,

49

52

were all in one ditch together: such was it there,
and a stench came from it like that from rotting
limbs.
We climbed down to the last bank from the long
ridge, still to the left; and then my sight was livelier

D5

down toward the bottom, where the minister of

58

the Lord, infallible justice, punishes the falsifiers that
it registers here.
I do not believe it was a greater sadness to see
in Aegina the whole people sick, when the air
was so full of malice

61

that the animals, down to the little worm, all fell—

and then the ancient people, according to what the
poets firmly believe,

64

67

were restored from the seed of ants—than it was to
see, along that dark valley, the spirits languishing in
different heaps.
This one lay over another’s stomach, that one over
another’s shoulders, and this one crawling transmuted
himself down the evil road.

453

Inferno

70

73

76

79

82

85

Passo passo andavam sanza sermone,
guardando e ascoltando li ammalati,
che non potean levar le lor persone.
Io vidi due sedere a sé poggiati,
com’ a scaldar si poggia tegghia a tegghia,
dal capo al pié di schianze macolati;
e non vidi gia mai menare stregehia
a ragazzo aspettato dal segnorso,
né a colui che mal volontier vegghia,
come ciascun menava spesso il morso
de l’unghie sopra sé per la gran rabbia
del pizzicor, che non ha piu soccorso;
e si traevan giu l’unghie la scabbia,
come coltel di scardova le scaglie
o d’altro pesce che piu larghe l’abbia.
“O tu che con le dita ti dismaglie,”
comincio 7] duca mio a |’un di loro,

88

oi

94

97

“e che fai d’esse talvolta tanaglie,
dinne s’alcun Latino é tra costoro
che son quinc’ entro, se l’unghia ti basti
etternalmente a cotesto lavoro.”
“Latin siam noi, che tu vedi si guasti
qui ambedue,” rispuose l’un piangendo;
“ma tu chi se’ che di noi dimandasti?”
E ’] duca disse: “I’ son un che discendo
con questo vivo giu di balzo in balzo,
e di mostrar lo ’nferno a lui intendo.”
Allor si ruppe lo comun rincalzo,
e tremando ciascuno a me si volse,

con altri che l’udiron di rimbalzo.
100

Lo buon maestro a me tutto s’accolse,

dicendo: “Di a lor cid che tu vuoli”;
103

€ 10 incominciai, poscia ch’ei volse:
“Se la vostra memoria non s’imboli
nel primo mondo da l’umane menti,
ma s’ella viva sotto molti soli,

106

ditemi chi voi siete e di che genti;
la vostra sconcia e fastidiosa pena
di palesarvi a me non vi spaventi.”

454

Canto 29

70

Step by step we walked without speech, seeing
and hearing the sick, who could not lift their bodies.

73

I saw two sitting propped against each other, as
one props pan against pan to cool, both from head to
foot all spotted with scabs;
and I have never seen a currycomb so plied by a
boy awaited by his master, or by one who unwilling
stayed awake,
as each one of them plied the bite of his
fingernails on himself, for the great rage of the itch,
which no longer has any remedy;
their nails tore off the scabs like knives
scaling bream or some other fish with larger scales.
“O you who dismail yourself with your fingers,”
began my leader to one of them, “and at times make
pincers of them,
tell us if any Italian is among those in here, so
may your nail suffice eternally for this work.”

76

79

82
85

88

“We are Italians, whom you see so ruined here,

91

94

97

100

both of us,” one replied weeping; “but who are you
who have asked about us?”
And my leader said: “I am one descending with
this living man from ledge to ledge, and I intend to
show him Hell.”
Then the mutual support was broken, and
trembling each of them turned to me, along with
others who heard the words as if by echo.
My good master drew near to me, saying: “Say to
them what you wish”; and I began, since he wished

it:
103

106

“So may your memory not be stolen from human
minds in the first world, so may it live for many
suns,
tell me who you are and of what people; let not your
filthy and disgusting punishment make you fear
to reveal yourselves to me.”

455

Inferno

109

“To fui d’Arezzo, e Albero da Siena,”

net

rispuose l’un, “mi fé mettere al foco;
ma quel per ch’io mori’ qui non mi mena.
Vero é€ ch’i’ dissi lui, parlando a gioco:
‘TY mi saprei levar per l’aere a volo’;
e quei, ch’avea vaghezza e senno poco,

115

118

volle ch’i’ li mostrassi l’arte; e solo

perch’ io nol feci Dedalo, mi fece
ardere a tal che l’avea per figliuolo.
Ma ne l’ultima bolgia de le diece
me per l’alchimia che nel mondo usai
danno Minos, a cui fallar non lece.”

121

124

E io dissi al poeta: “Or fu gia mai
gente si vana come la sanese?
Certo non la francesca si d’assai!”
Onde l’altro lebbroso, che m/’intese,

rispuose al detto mio: “Tra’mene Stricca,
che seppe far le temperate spese,
127

130

133

e Niccolo, che la costuma ricca

del garofano prima discoverse
ne l’orto dove tal seme s’appicca,
e tra’ne la brigata in che disperse
Caccia d’Ascian la vigna e la gran fonda,
e l’Abbagliato suo senno proferse.
Ma perché sappi chi si ti seconda
contra i Sanesi, aguzza ver’ me |’occhio,

136

si che la faccia mia ben ti risponda:
si vedrai ch’io son l’ombra di Capocchio,
che falsai li metalli con |’alchimia;
e te dee ricordar, se ben t’adocchio,

139

com’ io fui di natura buona scimia.”

456

Canto 29

109

“T was from Arezzo, and Albero of Siena,” replied
one, “sent me to the fire; but what I died for is not

112

115

118

121

124

A7/

130

133

136

139

what leads me here.
It is true that I told him, joking: ‘I could raise
myself through the air in flight’; and he, who had
eagerness but little sense,
wanted me to show him the art; and only because
I did not make him Daedalus, he had me burned by
one who loved him as a son.
But to the last pocket of the ten, for alchemy,

which I practiced in the world, Minos damned me,
who may not err.”
And I said to my poet: “Now was there ever a
people so foolish as the Sienese? Certainly not the
French, by far!”
And the other leper, who heard me, replied to my
word: “Except for Stricca, he knew how to spend
moderately,
and Nicholas, who first discovered the rich

custom of cloves, in the garden where that seed takes
root,
and except for the crew for whom Caccia
d’Asciano used up his vineyard and his great
farmlands, and to whom Bedazzled displayed his
wisdom.
But so that you may know who seconds you
against the Sienese, sharpen your eye toward me, that
my face may answer to you:
then you will see that I am the shade of
Capocchio, who falsified metals with alchemy; and
you must remember, if I eye you well,
how good an ape I was of nature.”

as
457

NOTES

1-36. The multitude ... compassionate toward him: The first part of
the canto continues the theme of the sowers of discord (bolgia 9); the emphasis
on the multitude and on the pilgrim’s hallucinated fixation on the wounds recalls the opening of the previous canto.

1-3. The multitude ... stay and weep: For drunkenness with the spectacle of blood, see Augustine’s account of Alypius at the gladiatorial contests in
Confessions 6.8:
For when he saw that blood, he drank cruelty in with it and did not turn
away, but he fixed his sight on it and drank in fury unaware and he took
pleasure in the wickedness of the spectacle and became drunk [inebniabatur]
with pleasure in blood.

The pilgrim’s attitude is more ambiguous, but it still involves some degree of
participation in the sin of the bolgia.
9. the valley turns for twenty-two miles: That is, its circumference is twentytwo miles. Dante clearly has in mind the well-known fact that the ratio of circumference to diameter of a circle (pi) is 22:7; this means, of course, that the

diameter of this bolgia is seven miles. In the sixteenth century, there were several
attempts to calculate the exact dimensions of all of Hell on the basis of this indication. For the association of the number eleven with sin, see the note to 11.16—
TAME

10-11. already the moon ... granted us: Since the moon is two days past
full (20.127), the time in Jerusalem is early afternoon on Saturday. Virgil’s reference to a limit on the time granted them seems a clear reference to the widespread folk tradition that visits to the other world must be completed within
twenty-four hours (the journey began at nightfall on Friday; 2.1): only four or
five hours, then, remain (but see 34.96, with note). In figural terms, of course,

the arrival on the shore of the mountain of Purgatory must take place on Easter
morning.

13-21. If you had attended . . . costs so much down there: The pilgrim
claims that he was lingering in order to catch sight of one of his relatives (Virgil
identifies this relative in line 27). These lines are not inconsistent with lines
1—3; rather, they identify his desire to see his relative as itself part of the addic-

tion to bloody spectacle.

458

Notes to Canto 29

20. of my blood: It is partly the sense of the closeness, the materiality even, of
the blood tie that explains the duty of exacting vengeance for the spilling of it
(lines 32-33).
22. Let not your thought break over him: The metaphor has been variously explained; we interpret it as comparing Dante’s relative to a rock projecting for the moment above the waves of the sea (cf. 20.3: “this first canticle, which
is of those submerged”; the imagery of voyage and shipwreck has permeated the
Inferno). Let him sink, Virgil is saying.
25-27. Isaw him. . . Geri del Bello: The threatening gesture is presumably
a stabbing motion. Dante’s sons Jacopo and Pietro in their commentaries identify Geri del Bello, well known as an instigator of violence, as a second cousin of
Dante’s on his father’s side; the date of his death is unknown but apparently later
than 1280. Benvenuto says that the Alighieri took vengeance on Geri’s killer, a
member of the Sacchetti family, in 1310; Pietro Alighieri says that the families
were formally reconciled in 1342. (There are detailed articles on what is known
of Dante’s relatives in E.D.)
29. Hautefort: Hautefort was Bertran de Born’s castle (see the note to 28.134).

31-36. his violent death . . . compassionate toward him: The obligation
of private vengeance was recognized by law in the Italian communes; vengeance
was punished—in theory at least—only if it was judged excessive. Dante’s position on the matter is complex: the pilgrim feels the shame of the affront (line 33)
and seems to acknowledge that Geri’s resentment at being unavenged is justified. At the same time, vengeance is reserved to God by the Old and New Testaments (Deut. 32.35: “Revenge is mine,” quoted in Romans 12.19) and was
in Dante’s time a major political problem resulting from the breakdown of central authority (the empire). The temptation to avenge Geni is closely related to
the sin of the bolgia (cf. Mosca, 28.103—11: the ruinous feud between the Amidei
and the Buondelmonti, to which Dante traced all the disasters of recent Florentine

history, originated in the desire for revenge).
40-45. When we were above . . . with my hands: Sounds from the new bolgia
are said to strike the pilgrim’s ears only when he reaches the point where it is fully
revealed to sight, a touch characteristic of Dante’s tendency to establish sharp boundaries between the parts of the other world (cf. a similar transition in 3.21—22).
40, 41. cloister, converts:

Sarcastic monastic imagery, as in 23.90—91, but

see the note on hospitals (lines 47—48).

43-44. strange lamentings . . . made of pity: The idea that the lamentings
pierce the pilgrim with pity occasions the metaphor of their being arrows whose
sharp iron points are made of pity.

459

Inferno

46-69. What the suffering . . down the evil road: The last bolgia is introduced in a manner closely parallel to the previous one (28.1—12): there the slaughter of the countless battles afflicting southern Italy, here the malaria prevalent in
the marshy parts of Italy (even in the twentieth century: the Pontine marshes
south of Rome and parts of the Maremma were drained only under Mussolini).
Both panoramas are versions of the social consequences of fraud, the evils of the

body politic. See Additional Note 13.
47-48. hospitals of Valdichiana ... Maremma... Sardinia: These are
all regions where malaria was particularly virulent: the Valdichiana (valley of the
river Chiana, a tributary of the Arno) is in southeastern Tuscany, between Arezzo

and Chiusi; the Maremma is in southwestern Tuscany. The establishment of
hospitals for malaria victims was the mission of several religious orders.

57. the falsifiers that it registers here: “The falsifiers” announces the sin
punished in this bolgia, of which, it will turn out, there are several distinct cat-

egories (hence, perhaps, the registry). Most commentators take the phrase “that
it registers here” as a reference to the books in which good and bad deeds are
recorded by the angels, to be read out at the Last Judgment (Apoc. 20.12),
referred to also in Par. 19.112-13; they take “here” to mean “in this life.”

58-66. I do not believe ... different heaps: The reference is to Ovid’s
retelling of the myth in Met. 7.523—660: Aegina, a small island near Athens, was
depopulated by a plague caused by Juno’s anger; its king, Aeacus, begged Jupiter for help and in a dream saw the ants becoming men; his new followers appear
in a manner that recalls his dream (it should be noted that Ovid’s “assertion” of
the myth is unusually guarded). In Convivio 4.27.17, Dante approvingly cites
Aeacus for his appeal to God but does not mention the ants.
In Ovid’s account, the plague occurs when dark clouds, hot weather, and south
winds infect the springs and the lakes (533); it attacks first animals (536), and
then men (552), the latter especially through the odor of the dead animals (548,
551); Dante refers only to the malignity of the air (line 60), sharpening the parallel with malaria. Ovid’s description offers a number of suggestions for the heaping and indiscriminate scattering of bodies (especially lines 559-60, 570-71, 574,
and 581); Dante’s touch of the tiny worm dying is not in Ovid (and would seem
inconsistent with the survival of the ants), though Dante may have considered it
implied in the deaths of the large animals (537-81).
66. heaps: The Italian is biche, properly used of the heaped sheaves of harvested
grain waiting to be stored (the harvest is implicitly a reference to the Last
Judgment).

68-69. this one crawling transmuted himself: Carpone [on all fours] echoes 25.140-41, on the crawling of the new lizard. The striking “transmuted

himself” (si trasmutava) for “transferred himself”

460

is an anticipation of the theme

Notes to Canto 29

of alchemy, which pretended to transmute lesser metals into gold, as well as an
echo of the grotesque transmutations of the bolgia of the thieves.

73-84. I saw two ... larger scales: The early commentators identified the
disease from which the two are suffering as either scabies or leprosy; leprosy (in
its medieval sense) seems the more likely. Bosco (E.D. 3, s.v. lebbra) cites the
widely used thirteenth-century encyclopedia by Bartholomaeus Anglicus, De
proprietatibus rerum (7.64), on one type of leprosy, called “serpentine”: “it is scaly:
the patient suffering from this type of leprosy easily loses the surface of his skin,
which is resolved in a kind of scaliness”; Bartholomaeus also says that stench and
itch are characteristic of it. Nardi (1944) suggested that the choice of this disease
as the punishment for alchemists was derived from their way of considering base
metals to be “diseases of gold” and lead, in particular, as the “leprosy of gold.”
The frenetic activity of these two sharply distinguishes them from the others so
far described.
76-78. I have never seen . . . stayed awake: Two examples of extreme haste,
a stable boy using the currycomb on a horse while his master waited, presumably with impatience, and one currying a horse late at night when anxious to
sleep.
85. O you who dismail yourself: The metaphor implicitly compares the scabs
to the circles of metal of which a coat of chain mail is fashioned. But the analogy is much closer with ancient scale armor; Dante knew Vergil’s descriptions,

such as Aen. 11.487—88 (of Turnus): “iamque adeo rutilum thoraca indutus aénis/
horrebat squamis. . .” |and already, putting on shining body-armor, he bristled
with bronze scales . . .]|. The comparison to the scales of snakes was natural and
underlies the famous description of the armed Pyrrhus in Aen. 2.469—75.
109-19.

I was from Arezzo . . . practiced in the world: The early com-

mentators identify this alchemist as one Griffolino, burned at the stake in Siena

before 1272 for heresy. Albero (or Alberto) of Siena was a nobleman whose
existence is attested by documents, favored by the bishop—or the inquisitor—
“one who loved him as a son,” line 117 (the early commentators take line 117

to mean that Albero was literally the son of the bishop).
116. I did not make him Daedalus: That is, I did not teach him to fly. The
allusion to Daedalus, especially in a context stressing fatherly love, suggests that
Griffolino is in some sense parallel to Icarus: his overweening joke flew too high
for Albero! (Cf. the references to Icarus in 17.109—11, 26.110-11.)

119. alchemy: Alchemy, then, is the first category offalsification in this bolgia.
Medieval writers distinguish permissible alchemy (the ancestor of modern chemistry)—the effort to discover the substance common to all metals and achieve
their transmutation, especially of base metals into gold—from the fraudulent

461

Inferno

variety. The notoriety of fraudulent alchemy can be gauged by the many laws
against it, as well as from texts like Chaucer’s “Canon Yeoman’s Prologue,” an

exposé of a fraudulent alchemist by his servant. The cooking metaphors of the
canto are related to the concoctions and reductions of alchemy.
121-23.

Now was there ever ... the French, by far: Dante also makes

fun of the vanity and credulity of the Sienese in Purg. 13.151-54; Boccaccio
(Trattatello) says he visited the city a number of times. The vanity of the French
was proverbial.
125-32. Except for Stricca ... Nicholas ... the crew ... Caccia...
Bedazzled: These are notorious Sienese spendthrifts of the late thirteenth century (the theme relates this passage closely to the spendthrifts in 13.110—35).
Stricca has been variously identified as a member of the prominent Salimbeni or
Tolomei family. Nicholas may have been his brother; the spice clove, which
had to be imported from the East, was extremely expensive in this period (“the
garden where that seed takes root” is, of course, Siena; appiccarsi [literally, to
adhere] is used also of two thieves in 25.61). The Italian term brigata, which we
translate as “crew,” refers to the medieval Italian custom of informal groups (apparently often of about a dozen persons, and often of both sexes, especially later
in the fourteenth century) who met periodically to socialize. This one was said
to have been twelve rich young men of Siena who put their entire fortunes into
one fund and consumed it in twenty months, partying and banqueting; among
them were Caccianemico degli Scialenghi d’Asciano and Bartolommeo dei
Folcacchieni, called L’Abbagliato [Bedazzled], who is known to have repeatedly
served as podesta of other cities and to have died in 1300.
Note the emphasis on expensive seasonings for foods in comparison with the
necessities themselves. See Additional Note 13.
133-39.

But so that you . . . of nature: The soul, Capocchio, now identi-

fies himself as someone the pilgrim can recognize. Benvenuto says that Capocchio
was a Florentine and possessed the academic title magister; Buti and others say
that he and Dante studied natural science together—if so, probably materia medica
(Dante qualified for membership in the Arte dei Medici e Speziali [the Guild of
Physicians and Pharmacists]). Capocchio was burned at the stake in Siena in 1293;
the order for payment of his executioners is recorded in the city archives.

134. sharpen your eye: The same word (aguzzare) used, though in a slightly
different sense, of the band of homosexuals in 15.20.

139. how good an ape I was of nature: How well I could imitate nature,
presumably in his imitation gold and silver, but some early commentators say
that Capocchio was a famous and witty mimic. The Romance of the Rose seems
to be one of the earliest texts to speak of art as the “ape of nature” (the metaphor

462

Notes to Canto 29

is partly derogatory, since the products of art are always inferior to those of nature). Art, says Jean de Meun (lines 15999-16001),
si garde conment Nature euvre,

car mout voudroit fere autele euvre,

et la contrefet conme singes.
[watches how nature operates,
for it would dearly wish to make such a work,

and it imitates her like an ape.]
See Curtius 1953. All the inmates of this bolgia are “apes” in the sense of producing debased imitations.

463

CANTO

30

Nel tempo che Iunone era crucciata
per Semelé contra ’] sangue tebano,
come mostro una e altra fiata,

10

13

Atamante divenne tanto insano
che, veggendo la moglie con due figli
andar carcata da ciascuna mano,
grido: “Tendiam le reti, si ch’io pigli
la leonessa e ’ leoncini al varco!”
E poi distese i dispietati artigli,
prendendo l’un ch’avea nome Learco,
e rotollo e percosselo ad un sasso;
e quella s’annego con l’altro carco.
E quando la Fortuna volse in basso
Valtezza de’ Troian che tutto ardiva,

si che ’nsieme col regno il re fu casso,
16

Ecuba trista, misera e cattiva,

poscia che vide Polissena morta,
e del suo Polidoro in su la riva
ie,

del mar si fu la dolorosa accorta,
forsennata latro si come cane,

22

tanto il dolor le fe la mente torta.
Ma ne di Tebe furie né troiane
si vider mii in alcun tanto crude,
non punger bestie, nonché membra umane,

25

28

quant’ io vidi in due ombre smorte e nude,
che mordendo correvan di quel modo
che ’] porco quando del porcil si schiude.
L’un giunse a Capocchio, e in sul nodo
del collo Passanno, si che, tirando,

grattar li fece il ventre al fondo sodo.

464

CANTO

30

Tenth bolgia, continued: impersonators: Gianni Schicchi, Myrrha—
counterfeiter: Master Adam—false witnesses: Sinon, Potiphar’s wife—
Slyting—Virgil’s rebuke, pilgrim’s apology

In the time when, because of Semele, Juno was

angry against the blood of Thebes, as she showed
once and again,
Athamas became so insane, that, seeing his wife

walking with his two sons on either hand,
he cried: “Spread the nets, so that I may catch the
lioness and her cubs at the crossing!” And then he
stretched out his pitiless claws,
10

13

taking the one whose name was Learchus, and
whirled him and struck his head against a rock; and
she drowned herself with her other burden.
And when Fortune leveled to the ground the
pride of the Trojans, all aflame, so that along with his
kingdom the king was broken,

16

Hecuba, sorrowing, wretched, and a captive, after

19

she saw Polyxena dead, and, grieving, had perceived
her Polydorus on the shore
of the sea, going mad, she barked like a dog, her
grief had so twisted her mind.
But neither Theban furies nor Trojan ever made

Pop

anyone so cruel, not to wound beasts, let alone
human limbs,
25

28

as two pallid, naked shades I saw, who ran biting
in the manner of the pig when the sty is opened.
One reached Capocchio and set his tusk into the
knot of his neck so that, dragging, he made him
scratch his belly on the solid floor.

465

Inferno

Sil

E l’Aretin, che rimase, tremando

mi disse: “Quel folletto é Gianni Schicchi,
e va rabbioso altrui cosi conciando.”
34

“Oh,” diss’ io lui, “se l’altro non ti ficchi
li denti a dosso, non ti sia fatica

oy)

a dir chi é, pria che di qui si spicchi.”
Ed elli a me: “Quell’ é l’animia antica
di Mirra scellerata, che divenne

40

al padre, fuor del dritto amore, amica.
Questa a peccar con esso cosi venne,
falsificando sé in altrui forma,
come I’altro che 1a sen va, sostenne,

43

per guadagnar la donna de la torma,
falsificare in s¢ Buoso Donati,

46

testando e dando al testamento norma.”
E poi che i due rabbiosi fuor passati
sovra cu’ io avea l’occhio tenuto,

rivolsilo a guardar li altri mal nati.

49

52

55

58

61

Io vidi un, fatto a guisa di léuto,

pur ch’elli avesse avuta |’anguinaia
tronca da l’altro che l’uomo ha forcuto.
La grave idropesi, che si dispaia
le membra con l’omor che mal converte
che ’] viso non risponde a la ventraia,
faceva lui tener le labbra aperte
come l’etico fa, che per la sete
Pun verso ’] mento e l’altro in su rinverte.
“O voi che sanz’ alcuna pena siete,
e non so io perché, nel mondo gramo,”
diss’ elli a noi, “guardate e attendete
a la miseria del maestro Adamo;
io ebbi, vivo, assai di quel ch’i’ volli,

64

e ora, lasso! un gocciol d’acqua bramo.
Li ruscelletti che d’i verdi colli
del Casentin discendon giuso in Arno,
faccendo i lor canali freddi e molli,

67

sempre mi stanno innanzi, e non indarno,

ché l’imagine lor vie pit m’asciuga
che ’] male ond’ io nel volto mi discarno.
466

Canto 30

31

And the Aretine, who remained, trembling told
me: “That goblin is Gianni Schicchi, and in his rage
he goes treating others so.”

34

“Oh,” I said to him, “so may the other not set his

Sy)

teeth in you, let it not be a labor to tell me who he is,
before he disappears.”
And he to me: “That is the ancient soul of
wicked Myrrha, who became, beyond right love, her

40

father’s lover.
She came to sin with him by counterfeiting herself
in another’s shape, just as the other who goes off
there,

43

46

49
52

to gain the queen of the herd dared to counterfeit
in himself Buoso Donati, making a will and giving it
legal form.”
And when the two rabid shades, on whom I had

kept my eyes, had passed, I turned to gaze at the
other ill-born ones.
I saw one made in the shape of a lute, if he had
had his groin cut from the other forked part.
The heavy dropsy that so unpairs the members,
with the liquid that it ill converts, that the face
does not answer to the belly,

55

made him hold his lips open, as a fevered person

58

toward his chin and the other upward.
“O you who are without any punishment, and I

does, who in his thirst turns one of them down

know not why, in this grim world,” he said to us,

“gaze and attend
61

to the wretchedness of Master Adam; alive, I had
much of whatever I wished, and now, alas, I crave a

64

drop of water.
The little streams that from the green hills of the
Casentino come down into Arno, making their
channels cool and moist,

67

always stand before me, and not in vain, for their

image dries me far more than the disease that robs
my face of flesh.

467

Inferno

70

La rigida giustizia che mi fruga
tragge cagion del loco ov’ io peccai
a'metter pit li miei sospiri in fuga.

US)

Ivi € Romena, 1a dov’ io falsai

76

la lega suggellata del Batista,
per ch’io il corpo sw arso lasciai.
Ma s’io vedessi qui |’anima trista

TS

per Fonte Branda non darei la vista.
Dentro c’é l’una gia, se l’arrabbiate

di Guido o d’Alessandro o di lor frate,

ombre che vanno intorno dicon vero;
82

85

88

Wil

94

Oy

100

ma che mi val, c’ho le membra legate?
S’io fossi pur di tanto ancor leggero
ch’i’ potessi in cent’ anni andar un’oncia,
10 sarei messo gia per lo sentiero,
cercando lui tra questa gente sconcia,
con tutto ch’ella volge undici miglia
e men d’un mezzo di traverso non ci ha.
Io son per lor tra si fatta famiglia:
e’ m’indussero a batter li fiorini
ch’avevan tre carati di mondiglia.”
E io a lui: “Chi son li due tapini
che fumman come man bagnate ’] verno,
giacendo stretti a’ tuoi destri confini?”
“Qui li trovai—e poi volta non dierno—”
rispuose, “quando piovvi in questo greppo,
e non credo che dieno in sempiterno.
L’una é la falsa ch’accuso Gioseppo;
laltr’ é ’] falso Sinon greco di Troia:
per febbre aguta gittan tanto leppo.”
E lun di lor, che si recd a noia

forse d’esser nomato si oscuro,
103

col pugno li percosse l’epa croia.
Quella sono come fosse un tamburo;
e mastro Adamo li percosse il volto
col braccio suo, che non parve men duro,

106

dicendo a lui: “Ancor che mi sia tolto
lo muover per le membra che son gravi,
ho il braccio a tal mestiere sciolto.”
468

Canto 30

70

73

76

The rigid justice that probes me takes occasion
from the place where I sinned, to put my sighs the more
to flight.
There is Romena, where I falsified the alloy sealed
with the Baptist, for which I left my body burned up
there.
But if I might see here the wicked soul of Guido
or Alessandro or their brother, for Fonte Branda I

79

would not trade the sight.
One of them has already come, if the raging
shades who run about here tell the truth; but what

82

85
88

91

94

does it help me, since my members are bound?
If I were just so light that in a hundred years I
could go one inch, I would have already set out on
the path,
searching through all this filthy people, although it
turns for eleven miles and is no less than half a mile across.
Because of them I am among such a household:
they induced me to mint the florins that had three
carats of dross.”
And I to him: “Who are the two wretches smoking
like wet hands in winter, lying close on your righthand boundary?”
“Here I found them—and since then they have
not even turned over—” he replied, “when I rained
down into this pit, and I do not believe they will for
eternity.

OT,

100

103

One is the false woman who accused Joseph; the
other is false Greek, Sinon of Troy: because of acute
fever they throw out such a stench.”
And one of them, who perhaps resented being
named so darkly, with his fist struck him on his taut
belly.
That resounded as if it were a drum; and Master

Adam struck the other’s face with his arm, which
seemed no less hard,
106

saying to him: “Although I am deprived of
movement by my heavy limbs, I have an arm loose
for such business.”
469

Inferno

109

i

115

118

2

124

Ond’ ei rispuose: “Quando tu andavi
al fuoco, non |’avei tu cosi presto;
ma si e pit l’avei quando coniavi.”
E l’idropico: “Tu di’ ver di questo,
ma tu non fosti si ver testimonio
la ’ve del ver fosti a Troia richesto.”
“Sio dissi falso, e tu falsasti il conio,”

disse Sinon; “e son qui per un fallo,
e tu per piu ch’alcun altro demonio!”
“Ricorditi, spergiuro, del cavallo,”
rispuose quel ch’avéa infiata l’epa;
“e sieti reo che tutto il mondo sallo!”
“E te sia rea la sete onde ti crepa,”
disse ’] Greco, “la lingua, e l’acqua marcia
che ’] ventre innanzi a li occhi si t’assiepa!”
Allora il monetier: “Cosi si squarcia
la bocca tua per tuo mal come suole;
ché, s’i’ ho sete e omor mi rinfarcia,

127

130

133

136

139

tu hai l’arsura e ’] capo che ti duole,
e per leccar lo specchio di Narcisso
non vorresti a ’nvitar molte parole.”
Ad ascoltarli er’ io del tutto fisso,

quando ’| maestro mi disse: “Or pur mira,
che per poco che teco non mi risso!”
Quand’ io ’] senti’ a me parlar con ira,
volsimi verso lui con tal vergogna
ch’ancor per la memoria mi si gira.
Qual é colui che suo dannaggio sogna,
che sognando desidera sognare,
si che quel ch’é, come non fosse, agogna,
tal mi fec’ io, non possendo parlare,
che disiava scusarmi, e scusava

me tuttavia, e nol mi credea fare.
142

“Maggior difetto men vergogna lava,”
disse ’] maestro, “che ’] tuo non é stato;

145

148

pero d’ogne trestizia ti disgrava.
E fa ragion ch’io ti sia sempre allato,
se piu avvien che Fortuna t’accoglia
dove sien genti in simigliante piato:
ché voler cio udire é bassa voglia.”
470

Canto 30

109

112

115

118

121

124

And he replied: “When you were going to the fire,
you didn’t have it so ready; but that much and more
you had it when you were coining.”
And the hydroptic: “You say true there, but you
were not such a true witness where you were asked
for the truth at Troy.”
“If I spoke falsely, you falsified the coinage,” said
Sinon, “and I am here for one fault, but you for more
than any other demon!”
“Remember, perjurer, the Horse,” replied he of the
swollen liver; “and let it be bitter to you that the
whole world knows of it!”
“And to you bitter be the thirst that cracks,” said
the Greek, “your tongue, and the stagnant water that
makes of your belly a hedge before your eyes!”
Then the coiner: “Your mouth gapes because of
your disease, as usual; for, if I am thirsty and liquid
swells me,

127

130

133

136

you have burning fever and a head that aches,
and to lick the mirror of Narcissus you would not
need to be invited with many words!”
I was all intent to listen to them, when my master
said to me: “Now keep looking, for I am not far from
quarreling with you!”
When I heard him speak to me angrily, I turned
toward him with such shame that it still dizzies me in
memory.
Like one who dreams of harm, and, dreaming,

wishes he were dreaming, so that he yearns for what
is as if it were not,
139

142

so I became, unable to speak, wishing to excuse
myself, and I was excusing myself all along, though I
did not think so.
“Less shame washes away a greater fault,” said my
master, “than yours has been; therefore cast off all

145

148

sorrow.
And mind that I be always at your side, if it
happen again that Fortune find you where people are
in such a squabble:
for to wish to hear that is a base desire.”
471

NOTES

1-27. In the time ... when the sty is opened: This last canto of the
Malebolge has perhaps the most elaborate opening, along with 24.1—21, and is
a major instance of the featuring of Thebes and Troy in lower Heli (see the note
to 26.52-54). Commentators have remarked on a disproportion between the
atrocities in the myths and the actions of Gianni Schicchi and Myrrha. As a
modern Florentine and an ancient Greek, they are correlated with Master Adam

and Sinon (see the note to lines 100-129). The two are mentioned later as disseminators of news (lines 79-80).

1-12. In the time . . . her other burden: Juno, jealous of Semele (daughter
of Cadmus, founder of Thebes), first destroys Semele (Met. 3.259-313); later,

jealous of Semele’s son Bacchus, she has the Fury Tisiphoné (see the note to
9.30—-51) drive Athamas and his wife Ino (another daughter of Cadmus) mad
(Met. 4.464—-542). Dante sharply condenses Ovid’s account; he echoes particularly lines 512-19:
Protinus Aeolides media furibundus in aula
clamat, Io, comites, his retia tendite silvis!

hic modo cum gemina visa est mihi prole leaena,
utque ferae sequitur vestigia coniugis amens:
deque sinu matris ridentem et parva Learchum
bracchia tendentem rapit et bis terque per auras
more rotat fundae, rigidoque infantia saxo

discutit ora ferox.

[Suddenly the son of Aeolus (Athamas), mad in the midst of the palace,
cries, “Hurrah, comrades, spread the nets here in the woods!

here just now I saw a lioness with twin cubs.”
And he follows the footprints of his wife as if she were a beast,

and from his mother’s bosom seizes Learchus, who is laughing and
holding out his little arms, and whirls him in the air three, four times,

like a sling, and shatters his infant face against the hard stone
savagely.]
The theme of violence against children is central to Canto 33.

13-21. And when Fortune. . . twisted her mind: An even more condensed
epitome of events from Met. 13.408-575, also taking place by the sea. After the
fall of Troy (the Trojan Horse figures later in the canto), the former queen,
Hecuba, is enslaved by the Greeks. Sailing home, the Greeks stop in Thrace;

472

Notes to Canto 30

there Achilles’ ghost demands the sacrifice of Hecuba’s daughter Polyxena, over
whom she utters a long lament. When she goes to the seashore for water to wash
the body, she finds the body of her youngest, Polydorus, murdered by King
Polymnestor (Dante drew on Vergil’s version of the Polydorus story in Canto
13). She kills Polymnestor by thrusting her fingers into his eyes, and when the
Thracians hurl weapons and stones at her (lines 567-69):

. .. Missum rauco cum murmure saxum
morsibus insequitur rictuque in verba parato
latravit conata loqui.
[. . . the hurled stone she pursues with a hoarse murmur,
biting, and, when showing her teeth as if for words,

she barked when she tried to speak.]
Like Ovid, Dante leaves implicit Hecuba’s metamorphosis into a dog (explicit
in Euripides and Seneca); Athamas’s claws (line 9) also suggest a beast. The
medieval commentators on Ovid identify madness (alienation of mind) as one
of the forms of metamorphosis.

22-27. But neither . . . sty is opened: That is, the madness of Athamas and
Hecuba was not so cruel as that of these two shades. The animal references have
moved from lioness and cubs (line 8) to unspecified claws (line 9) to dog (line
20) to rabid pigs (cf. 13.112—13, in a context related to this one by the catalog of
Sienese spendthrifts in 29.125—32).

32. That goblin is Gianni Schicchi: This new category of falsifiers, the
impersonators, suffer from rabies. Bevenuto suggests the contrapasso: “as madness is an alienation of the mind, so they alienated theirs by assuming the person
of another.”” Gianni Schicchi is further identified in lines 42-45.
37-41.

That is the ancient soul . . . another’s shape: The story of Myrrha,

who became the mother of Adonis, is told in Met. 10.298-502. Line 39, “al
padre, fuor del dritto amore, amica” (cf. 5.103), makes contiguous the terms of
the etymological figure (italicized), of which the second, amica, is placed outside

the preceding parenthetical phrase. Scellerata (line 37) echoes Ovid’s use of the
term scelus [crime] to characterize Myrrha (Met. 10.314-15).
Jacoff (1988) points out most of the women shown in Hell have sinned sexually: Francesca (Canto 5), Thais (Canto 18), Myrrha (we may add Potiphar’s wife);
the others are Manto and the diviners (Canto 20) (see the note to 18.133-35).
41, 44. counterfeiting herself in, counterfeit in himself: Note the anti-

thetical symmetry of the two expressions, pointed out by Torraca; the point seems

473

Inferno

to be that both have equal validity: the impersonations wrong (“falsify”) both
the impersonator and the one impersonated.
42-45. just as the other . . . legal form: Gianni Schicchi, who died around
1280, was a prominent member of the Cavalcanti family, famous as a mimic.

No references to this story survive that antedate the Comedy. The early commentators relate that Simone Donati (the future, father of Corso, Forese, and

Piccarda) persuaded Gianni Schicchi to impersonate his dead uncle, Buoso
Donati, and to dictate a will in Simone’s favor; Gianni willed to himself the

“queen of the herd,” the most beautiful mare or mule in all Tuscany. Giacomo
Puccini wrote a richly comic one-act opera on the story.

45. making a will .. . legal form: That is, before a notary and witnesses.
Dante here condemns a violation of the legal norms that ensure the orderly transfer
of property; compare the concern with the Sienese spendthrifts that concluded
the last canto. The canto now reveals its major focus (see the note to lines 49-129).
49-129.

I saw one .. . invited with many words: The major focus of the

canto, and the conclusion of the Malebolge, focuses on two souls: Master Adam
and Sinon. The debasing of currency (Master Adam debased the florin, the foun-

dation of Florentine economic power) would be increasingly recognized, in the
course of the fourteenth century—which saw a number of monetary crises—as
a major economic problem affecting all of Europe (see Johnson 1956; Shoaf 1983).
Sinon of Troy (introduced in line 98) is an instance of false testimony, like Gianni
Schicchi, which in Sinon, Dante identifies as at the very root of Western his-

tory, the fall of Troy.

49-51. I saw one... the other
forked part: That is, if one ignored

the legs, the shape was that ofa lute,
which has an egg-shaped belly surmounted by a narrow neck (the fingerboard) that is bent back to accommodate the pegs for the strings
(the metaphor thus implies that the
soul is craning its neck; the lute is
to be imagined with its flat face
down [Figure 6]). Dante is drawing
on the traditional notion of Christ
on the Cross as being like a stringed
Figure 6. A lute, face down.
instrument, his tendons stretched on
the wood (Heilbronn 1983); this is a particularly rich instance of an infernal
punishment parodying the Crucifixion (cf. the notes to 23.100—102, 118-20 and

474

Notes to Canto 30

Additional Note 16). The drum of lines 102-3 would consist of skin stretched
on a wood frame.
52-57. The heavy dropsy ... the other upward: According to medieval
medical writers, the type of dropsy from which Master Adam is suffering, timpanite
[drum dropsy], bringing intense thirst, is caused by a malfunction of the liver,
which normally converts the food, already “cooked” by the heat of the stomach
and broken down into an intermediate liquid (omor, line 53), into blood, which
the heart then distributes to the rest of the body; the malfunction creates impure
humors that distend the belly while the other members, especially the face, lose

flesh (the face “does not reply to”—is out of proportion with—the belly: the
harmony, or tempering, of the fluids of the body is disrupted, so that the body
is like a discordant musical instrument; see Spitzer 1963). As the commentators
point out, these lines are characterized by unusual terms and harsh sounds, especially in rhyme: Jéuto [lute], ventraia [belly], dispaia [unpairs]|—the last two apparently coinages of Dante’s (cf. discarno [lose flesh], line 69); all refer to the belly
or lower body (cf. anguinaia [groin], forcuto [forked], lines 50-51).
57. turns one of them ... the other upward: Thus the lips, too, are “unpaired” by the disease.
58-129. O you... with many words: The scene with Master Adam moves
gradually from his learned, self-pitying effort to elicit sympathy to the futile
exchange of malicious taunts and blows with Sinon. Uniquely among the souls
of the other world, in this scene Master Adam entirely forgets his dialogue with
the pilgrim. Master Adam’s fixation on revenge, and its role in his damnation, is

similar to Ugolino’s. For Master Adam’s importance in the Malebolge as a whole,
see Additional Note 13.

58-90. O you... three carats of dross: Master Adam’s first speech is eleven
terzinas, thirty-three lines long. At its center, with ma [but], line 76 (to what
does the “but” refer?), the focus becomes his hatred and desire for vengeance.
58-61. O you... to the wretchedness of Master Adam: These lines echo
the famous passage in Lam. 1.12 (echoed by Dante also in Vita nuova 7 and in
28.130-32—Bertran de Born’s opening words; Lam. 1.1 is echoed in Vita nuova
29, 1.2 in Inf. 8.77), spoken by the personified Jerusalem after the destruction of
the city in 586 B.c.:
O vos omnes qui transitis per viam,
attendite et videte si est dolor sicut dolor meus,
quoniam vindemiavit me, ut locutus est Dominus in die irae furoris sui.

475

Inferno

[O you all who pass by in the road,
attend and see if there is any sorrow like my sorrow,

for the Lord has harvested me according to his word in the day of his anger
(trans. R. M. D.).]

Figurally the fall of Jerusalem, like the destruction of Sodom, looks forward to
the Last Judgment; tropologically these lines were interpreted as expressing the
fear of damnation. That Bertran de Born and Master Adam quote the same biblical passage, one spoken by a personification of the body politic, itself points to
the central theme of these cantos.
61. Master Adam: One Adam of England is identified in a legal document of
1277 as a “familiar” (that is, a member of the household) of the Conti Guidi of
Romenga; a chronicler relates that a representative of the Conti Guidi was burned

in Florence in 1281 for circulating counterfeit coins.
62-63. alive, I had ... drop of water: Dante is drawing on the parable of
the rich man and Lazarus (Luke 16.19-—31): the rich man dies and, burning in
Hell, sees in the bosom of Abraham (in Heaven) the beggar Lazarus, “full of
sores” in life, whom he had spurned. He begs to have Lazarus dip the tip of a
finger in water and bring it to him, and when Abraham replies that the gulf
between Heaven and Hell is absolute, the rich man begs him to have Lazarus
warn his five brothers; Abraham refuses, for “if they hear not Moses and the

Prophets, neither will they believe, if one rise again from the dead.”

64-75. The little streams . .. burned up there: The Casentino is a mountainous region east of Florence, including the upper basin of the Amo, in Dante’s
time under the control of the Conti Guidi (see the note to 16.34-39), of whose
castle at Romena the ruins still exist. The image of the streams intensifies Master
Adams thirst at several metaphorical levels beyond the literal: they are an image of
the health and innocence of the earth, contrasting sharply with Master Adam’s disease, and they imply the idea of baptism and its renewal of childlike innocence,
present also in the other image referred to, that of the Baptist stamped on the florin.
The supreme irony of the passage is that the very place where he sinned and the
products of his sin, if Master Adam had attended to them, could have led him to
repentance and salvation. Master Adam’s name, of course, is itselfareminder of the

theological context; he should have remembered the biblical Adam when he was
in the Edenic Casentino (on his offspring, see the notes to lines 79-90 and 118-20).
67. always stand before me: Dante has in mind the classical precedent
for such torments, Tantalus (Met. 4.458-59): “tibi, Tantale, nullae/ deprenduntur

aquae, quaeque inminet, effugit arbor” [no waters, Tantalus, can be caught by
you, and the tree above you flees].

476

Notes to Canto 30

70-72. The rigid justice ... the more to flight: In other words, God’s
justice probes Adam internally by causing the image of the streams to be ever
present to him; to dismiss it is beyond his power. Thus the true image of the
streams torments the producer of false images (i.e., counterfeit coins).

72. to put my sighs the more to flight: To make him sigh (pant) more
frequently.

73-74. where I falsified the alloy sealed with the Baptist: In order to
counterfeit florins, Master Adam had to imitate a distempered digestive system:
first he cooked and refined gold, producing a liquid (parallel to the first digestion in the stomach); then he contaminated the gold by adding dross (parallel to
the malfunction of the liver); finally, placing cast disks of the contaminated gold
in a die or matrix, with blows of a hammer he imprinted on them the outer
form of the florin—on one side, the Florentine lily, and on the other, the city’s

patron saint (see 13.143-50, with notes), John the Baptist; this imprinting is
parallel to the liver’s final production of blood (see Durling 1981a). The alloy of
the florin is “sealed with the Baptist” to testify (cf. line 45) to the correct weight
and composition of the coin. Master Adam’s term lega [alloy] also means “league”
or “covenant”; both refer to the social bond that his crime violates (11.56) and
are additional reminders of the Baptist’s call to repentance.
Medieval writers thought of money as the blood of the body politic; in their
conception the heart was a reservoir, and blood flowed outward from the heart
like a river (the idea of the circulation of blood is much later). Master Adam is
an image of a distempered body politic (see 28.142, with note, and Additional
Note 13).

76-90. But if I might see ... three carats of dross: Like the first half of
his speech, this half ends with the specification of his sin, this time even more
precise. Italian battere [to strike, to mint] refers to the hammer blow on the matrix.

The three carats of dross made Master Adam’s florins weigh twenty-one carats
instead of twenty-four.

78. for Fonte Branda ... trade the sight: Several candidates have been
suggested for what must have been a famous spring. Master Adam’s hatred is so
strong that he would prefer to witness his enemies’ suffering than to have his
thirst relieved. This amounts to preferring vengeance to salvation.

80. if the raging shades . . . tell the truth: In other words, Gianni Schicchi
and Myrrha—and presumably the other impersonators—are able to speak and
disseminate information.

477

Inferno

81. but what does it help . . . members are bound: Another “but,” whose
referent is worth considering. The Italian che mi val means literally “what is it
worth to me” (cf. coins) or “what power does it give me” (cf. 22.127). There is
an important pun in legate [bound], from the same root as lega (see note to lines
73-74): his limbs are incapable of motion, made of a contaminated alloy, and
bound by God’s judgment (in fact, he is a bondslave to the Old Law; he is the
Pauline Old Man of Romans 5.14-19, 6.6, and 7.17-24).

86-87. although it turns ... one across: In 29.9 Virgil told the pilgrim
that the circumference of the ninth bolgia was twenty-two miles; the diameter of
this tenth is half of the previous, thus three and a half miles.
88. household: The Italian term is famiglia (see the note to 15.22); Master
Adam’s contemptuous use of it expresses his pride in his learning and high social
status; we are also reminded that all the damned are members of Satan (see Additional Note 2) and ultimately his servants. In the clear allusions to the biblical
Adam in Master Adam’s name and the scene of his sin, we also have allusions to

the idea of the human family, all descended from him.
90. dross: Italian mondiglia derives from mondare [to cleanse]; it is the remnant
after cleansing.
91-93. Who are the two .. . right-hand boundary: The pilgrim’s tone is
sarcastic, both in his vivid simile and in his metaphoric use of “boundary”—as
if Master Adam’s belly were so huge as to constitute a geographic region (another reminder of the symbolism of the body politic). The two souls’ metaphorical
“smoking like wet hands” also reduces them in size next to Master Adam. The
vapor identifies them as suffering from a fourth disease, thus as a fourth category
of falsifier: the symptoms of their disease are those of what medieval writers identify as “putrid fever” (Contini 1953).

97-99. One is the false woman ... such a stench: Both Potiphar’s wife
and Sinon are formally guilty of perjury. The story of Potiphar’s wife, who tried
to seduce Joseph and, when he refused, accused him of attempting to rape her,
is told in Gen. 39.7—21. Sinon’s role in inducing the Trojans to take the horse
into the city is discussed in the note to 26.58-60. The “stench” (Italian leppo:
related to words for “fat,” it seems meant to evoke the smell of burning fat) is
the “smoke” of lines 92—93 (cf. 17.3: Geryon “makes the whole world stink,”

with note). The issue of perjury is closely related to the counterfeit florin: the
Baptist on it is bearing false witness to its quality.
These last two souls mentioned in the Malebolge are protagonists of two
major events in the (for Dante) parallel histories of the two chosen peoples:
Joseph’s success in Egypt (which led to the enslavement of the Jews and the
Exodus) and the fall of Troy (which led to the founding of Rome) (see the
note to lines 1-27).

478

Notes to Canto 30

100-129. And one of them ... with many words: The famous flyting
(exchange of taunts) between Master Adam and Sinon moves from blows (one
each) to verbal taunts (four for Master Adam, three for Sinon); the taunts progress
from naming sins to naming punishments in purely physical terms, thus gradually downward, each echoing and mirroring the previous one, until reaching
Narcissus and his mirror. Vergil’s Sinon, like Master Adam, is of noble birth, a

comrade and close relative (Aen. 2.86) of King Palamedes of Nauplia. The progressive degradation of their high status is part of the savage irony. The representation of the damned in this canto begins and ends with the crazy violence of
paired souls (cf. 32.43-51 and 124-32).
102-3. with his fist . . . a drum: Sinon’s blow establishes a relation between
Master Adam’s belly and the Trojan Horse, for it alludes to Laoco6n’s spear (Aen.
250-53);
... validis ingentem viribus hastam
in latus inque feri curvam compagibus alvum
contorsit. Stetit illa tremens, uteroque recusso
insonuere cavae gemitumque dedere cavernae.
[... with his great strength he hurled a huge spear
against the beast’s side, its belly curved with nbs.
It stood there trembling, and when the womb was struck
the hollow caverns resounded and gave a moan.]
The terms referring to Master Adam’s belly (I’epa croia [his taut liver], ventraia
[belly], line 54) resound onomatopoetically, like tamburo [drum], related to the
name of his disease.
102. on his taut belly: Here, as in 25.82 and 30.119, Dante uses epa, from the
Greek word for “liver” (epar), to refer to the belly; for the importance of the
liver to Master Adam’s disease, see the notes on lines 52-57 and 73-74.

104-11.

and Master Adam . . . when you were coining: As Sinon’s taunt

shows, Master Adam’s blow to his face is an analogue of the hammer blow that

stamps the coin.
112-14. You say true there... at Troy: The two falsifiers—one of words,
the other of coins—are now condemned to speak only truths, but they are bitter
truths that only intensify their pain.
117. for more than any other demon: Sinon is referring to the multitude
of false florins coined by Master Adam. As the terminology of minting and the
digestion metaphor suggest, there was an analogy between coining and reproduction in the Aristotelian theory: the formal principle in the father’s seed stamps
the father’s form on the mother’s blood. Master Adam’s contaminated florins

479

Inferno

are thus also, at another level, his evil offspring (cf. line 48: “li altri mal nati,”
and 3.115: “il mal seme d’Adamo”).
118-20. Remember, perjurer, the Horse . . . knows of it: The complexity of Sinon’s sin allows Master Adam to derive two taunts from it (as Sinon did
from his). The fact that the whole world (all the descendants of Adam; cf. Sinon’s

last taunt) knows of Sinon refers to what is perhaps the most painful side of his
punishment; the lower in Hell, the more unwilling souls are to be remembered
on earth.
123. a hedge before your eyes: An obstacle to sight (like the hill for which
the Pisans cannot see Lucca; 33.29-30), emblematic of Master Adam’s inability

to see beyond himself.
124-29. Your mouth gapes . . . with many words: Answering Sinon’s references to his (Adam’s) tongue and belly, Master Adam names Sinon’s mouth
and head, continuing the correlation between belly and face established by the

two blows that began the quarrel.
128-29.

to lick ... with many words: That is, Sinon is just as thirsty as

Master Adam; the “mirror of Narcissus” is a surface of water, like the pond where

Narcissus (named in the Comedy only here) fell in love with his own image and
died of desire for it (Met. 3.370—-503). The allusion to the standing water of
Narcissus’s pool brings the episode to a close with a parallel to the streams of the
Casentino of lines 64-66. The entire relation of Master Adam and Sinon has

been specular—they are reflections of each other: this is their infernal Narcissism, fixated on the image of their own despair and damnation (see the note on
the Medusa, Tydeus, and Menalippus in 32.130—31).

130-48. I was all intent . . . a base desire: The two cantos of the falsifiers
are thus framed by two rebukes of the pilgrim by Virgil (see 29.1—12), the second considerably more severe. The commentators point out that the entire flyting
had taken place under the aegis of a “comic-realistic” stylistic mode related to
the abusive tenzone (also a flyting) with Forese Donati of Dante’s youth (cf. Purg.
23.115—20), which the present passage far surpasses in energy and abusiveness,
and to which Dante would be in a sense bidding farewell (its authenticity has,
however, recently been questioned).
131-32.

Now

keep looking ... quarreling with you: Dante’s term for

“look” (mirare) was, as he knew, the etymon of acommon word for “mirror,”

miraglio. The pilgrim’s gazing is a form of mirroring (cf. 32.54), and if he and
Virgil quarreled, they would be a reflection of Sinon and Master Adam.

480

Notes to Canto 30

134-35. such shame that it still dizzies me: The shame still agitates him.
The pilgrim’s capacity for intense shame, resting on his ability to see himself
critically, distinguishes him from the falsifiers.
136—41. Like one who ... did not think so: The description of a dreamlike, hallucinatory state, within the function of lines 130—48, replaces the blood-

drunkenness of the opening of Canto 29 with a confusion whose function is to
bring the pilgrim back to himself.
145-47. And mind . . . such a squabble: Virgil is very close here to being
a personification of the pilgrim’s faculty of reason—that is, of his ability to reflect
on his actions, essential to freeing himself from the debased specularity of the
bolgia.

481

GANERO:

6I

Una medesma lingua pria mi morse
si che mi tinse l’una e l’altra guancia,
e poi la medicina mi riporse:
cosi od’ io che solea far la lancia
d’Achille e del suo padre esser cagione
prima di trista e poi di buona mancia.
Noi demmo il dosso al misero vallone
su per la ripa che ’| cinge dintorno,
attraversando sanza alcun sermone.
10

ts

Quiv’ era men che notte e men che giorno,

si che ’] viso m’andava innanzi poco;
ma io senti’ sonare un alto corno
tanto ch’avrebbe ogne tuon fatto fioco,
che, contra sé la sua via seguitando,

16

19

dirizzo li occhi miei tutti ad un loco.
Dopo la dolorosa rotta, quando
Carlo Magno perdé la santa gesta,
non sono si terribilmente Orlando.
Poco portai in la volta la testa,
che me parve veder molte alte torri;
ond’ io: “Maestro, di, che terra é questa?”

22

20

28

Ed elli a me: “Pero che tu trascorri
per le tenebre troppo da la lungi,
avvien che poi nel maginare abborri.
Tu vedrai ben, se tu la ti congiungi,
quanto ’| senso s’inganna di lontano;
pero alquanto piu te stesso pungi.”
Poi caramente mi prese per mano,
e disse: “Pria che noi siam piu avanti,
accio che ’| fatto men ti paia strano,

482

CAMEO.

O71

The giants—Nimrod—Ephialtes—Antaeus lowers them to Cocytus

One and the same tongue first stung me so that
both my cheeks were stained, and then held out the
medicine to me:
so I hear that the spear of Achilles and his father
was the cause first of ill and then of good reward.
We turned our backs on the wretched valley, up
along the bank that girds it round, crossing over
without further speech.
Here it was less than night and less than day, so
that my sight did not pierce far ahead; but I heard
the sound of a horn so loud
that it would make any thunder feeble, which
drew my eyes straight to one place, following its
path backward.
After the dolorous rout, when Charlemagne lost

the holy company, Roland did not sound his horn so
terribly.
I had not long held my head turned there, when I
seemed to see many high towers; therefore I: “Master,
22

DE

28

say, what city is this?”
And he to me: “Because your sight traverses the
shadows from too far away, your imagining is
blurred.
You will see clearly, when you reach it, how sense

is deceived by distance; therefore drive yourself a
little further.”
Then he took me affectionately by the hand and
said: “Before we are any closer, so that the fact may
seem less frightening to you,

483

Inferno

31

34

37

sappi che non son torri, ma giganti,
e son nel pozzo intorno da la ripa
da l’umbilico in giuso tutti quanti.”
Come, quando la nebbia si dissipa,
lo sguardo a poco a poco raffigura
cio che cela ’] vapor che I’aere stipa:
cosi, forando I’aura grossa e scura,
piu e piu appressando ver’ la sponda,
fuggiemi errore e cresciemi paura,

40

43

46

49

pero che, come su la cerchia tonda
Montereggion di torri si corona,
cosi la proda che ’] pozzo circonda
torreggiavan di mezza la persona
li orribili giganti, cui minaccia
Giove del cielo ancora quando tuona.
E io scorgeva gia d’alcun la faccia,
le spalle e ’] petto e del ventre gran parte,

e per le coste git ambo le braccia.
Natura certo, quando lascio l’arte
di si fatti animali, assai fé bene

52

55

58

61

64

per torre tali essecutori a Marte.
E sella d’elefanti e di balene
non si pente, chi guarda sottilmente
piu giusta e piu discreta la ne tene;
ché dove l’argomento de la mente
s’ageiugne al mal volere e a la possa,
nessun riparo vi puo far la gente.
La faccia sua mi parea lunga e grossa
come la pina di San Pietro a Roma,
e a sua proporzione eran l’altre ossa;
si che la ripa, ch’era perizoma
dal mezzo in git, ne mostrava ben tanto
di sovra, che di giugnere a la chioma
tre Frison s’averien dato mal vanto,

pero ch’i’ ne vedea trenta gran palmi
dal loco in git dov’ omo affibbia ’] manto.
67

“Raphel mai ameécche zabi almi,”

comincio a gridar la fiera bocca,
cui non si convenia piu dolci salmi.

484

Canto 31

31

know that they are not towers, but giants, and

they are in the pit, around its rim, from the navel
downward, all of them.”
34

As, when mist dissolves, the gaze little by little

makes out the shape of what the vapor-thickened air
had hidden,
37,

40

43

46

49

52

DD

58

so, boring through the thick dark atmosphere,
drawing closer and closer to the edge, my error fled
and my fear grew;
for, as above its circling walls Montereggione is
crowned by towers, so there above the bank that
circles the pit
towered with half their persons the horrible
giants, whom Jove still threatens from the sky when
he thunders.
And I already discerned the face of one, his
shoulders and breast, and a large part of his belly,
and down his sides both his arms.
Nature surely, when she left off the crafting of
animals like those, did well to deprive Mars of such
instruments.
And if she has not repented of elephants and
whales, whoever considers subtly will hold her more
just and more discreet;
for where sharpness of mind is joined to evil will
and power, there is no defence people can make
against them.
His face seemed as long and broad as the pine
cone of Saint Peter in Rome, and to that proportion
were his other bones;

61

64

67

so that the bank, which was his apron from the
waist down, left so much of him exposed above it
that to reach his mane
three Frisians would have boasted idly, for I saw
thirty great spans down from the place where the
mantle is clasped.
“Raphel mai amécche zabi almi,” the fierce mouth
began to shout, for no gentler psalms befitted it.

485

Inferno

70

UE

E 7] duca mio ver’ lui: “Anima sciocca,

tienti col corno, e con quel ti disfoga
quand’ ira o altra passion ti tocca!
Cércati al collo, e troverai la soga
che ’] tien legato, o anima confusa,

76

US

e vedi lui che ’] gran petto ti doga.”
Poi disse a me: “Elli stessi s’accusa:
questi ¢éNembrotto per lo cui mal coto
pur un linguaggio nel mondo non s’usa.
Lascianlo stare e non parliamo a voto;

ché cosi é a lui ciascun linguaggio
come ’] suo ad altrui, ch’a nullo é noto.”
82

Facemmo adunque piu lungo viaggio,
volti a sinistra; e al trar d’un balestro

85

trovammo l’altro assai pit fero e maggio.
A cigner lui qual che fosse ’] maestro
non so io dir, ma el tenea soccinto

dinanzi |’altro e dietro il braccio destro,
88

91

d’una catena che ’] tenea avvinto
dal collo in giu, si che ’n su lo scoperto
si ravvolgéa infino al giro quinto.
“Questo superbo volle esser esperto
di sua potenza contra ’] sommo Giove,”
disse ’] mio duca, “ond’ elli ha cotal merto.

94

97

100

103

106

Fialte ha nome, e fece le gran prove
quando i giganti fer paura a’ déi;
le braccia ch’el meno, gia mai non move.”
E io a lui: “S’esser puote, io vorrei

che de lo smisurato Briareo
esperienza avesser li occhi mei.”
Ond’ ei rispuose: “Tu vedrai Anteo
presso di qui, che parla ed é disciolto,
che ne porra nel fondo d’ogne reo.
Quel che tu vuo’ veder piu in la é molto,
ed é legato e fatto come questo,
salvo che piu feroce par nel volto.”
Non fu tremoto gia tanto rubesto
che scotesse una torre cosi forte
come Fialte a scuotersi fu presto.
486

Canto 31

70

And my leader toward him: “Foolish soul, be
content with your horn, give vent with that, when

73

anger or some other passion touches you!
Feel at your neck, and you will find the thong that
holds it, o befuddled soul, and there it is, curving

across your breast like a bow.”
76

19

82

Then he said to me: “Himself accuses himself; that

is Nimrod, because of whose evil thought the world
no longer speaks one language.
Let us leave him alone and not waste speech, for
to him every language is like his to others,
unknown.”
Therefore we took a longer path, turning to the
left; at the distance of a cross-bow shot we found the

85

next, much fiercer and larger.
Who was the master to bind him I cannot say, but
one arm was held in front and the right arm behind
him,

88

by a chain wrapped about him from the neck
down, so that on what we saw of him it made five

Ot

94

full turns.
“This proud one wished to prove his power
against highest Jove,” said my leader, “‘and thus is he
rewarded.
His name is Ephialtes, and he performed great
deeds when the giants made the gods afraid; the arm
he struck with then, he never moves.”

97

100

103

And I to him: “If it can be, I would wish my eyes
to have experience of the immense Briareus.”
And he replied: “You will see Antaeus near here,
who speaks and is unbound; he will place us at the
bottom of all wickedness.
He whom you wish to see is much further over
there, and he is bound and shaped like this one,

106

except that his face seems fiercer.”
Never could rough earthquake so violently shake
a tower as Ephialtes suddenly shook himself.

487

Inferno

109

i

Allor temett’ io pit che mai la morte,
e non v’era mestier piu che la dotta,
s'io non avessi viste le ritorte.
Noi procedemmo pit avante allotta,
e venimmo ad Anteo, che ben cinque alle,

1/5

118

121

124

127

sanza la testa, uscia fuor de la grotta.
“O tu che—ne la fortunata valle
che fece Scipion di gloria reda
quand’ Anibal co’ suoi diede le spalle—
recasti gia mille leon per preda,
e che, se fossi stato a l’alta guerra
de’ tuoi fratelli, ancor par che si creda
ch’avrebber vinto 1 figli de la terra:
mettine git, e non ten vegna schifo,
dove Cocito la freddura serra.
Non ci far ire a Tizio né a Tifo;

questi puo dar di quel che qui si brama;
pero ti china e non torcer lo grifo.
Ancor ti puo nel mondo render fama,
ch’el vive, e lunga vita ancor aspetta,

130

se ’nnanzi tempo grazia a sé nol chiama.”
Cosi disse ’] maestro; e quelli in fretta
le man distese, e prese ’] duca mio,

133

136

139

ond’ Ercule senti gia grande stretta.
Virgilio, quando prender si sentio,
disse a me: “‘Fatti qua, si ch’io ti prenda.”
Poi fece si ch’un fascio era elli e io.
Qual pare a riguardar la Carisenda
sotto *] chinato, quando un nuvol vada
sovr’essa si ched ella incontro penda:
tal parve Antéo a me che stava a bada
di vederlo chinare, e fu tal ora

142

ch’? avrei voluto ir per altra strada.
Ma lievemente al fondo che divora
Lucifero con Giuda ci sposd;
né, si chinato, li fece dimora,

145

e come albero in nave si levo.

488

Canto 31

109

Then more than ever I feared death, and the fright
alone would have sufficed, had I not seen his bonds.

mi

We walked further then, and we came to Antaeus,

who rose a good five ells, not counting his head, out
115

of the pit.
“O you who once—in the fortunate valley that
made Scipio the heir of glory when Hannibal and his
men turned tail—

118

brought in a thousand lions as your catch, and, if

124

you had been present at your brothers’ great war, it
seems some still believe
the sons of earth would have been victorious: set
us down, and do not disdain to do so, where the

124

127

130

133

cold locks in Cocytus.
Do not make us go to Tityos or to Typhon: this
man can give what here is desired; therefore bend
down and do not twist your snout.
He can still repay you with fame in the world, for
he is alive and expects long life still, if grace does not
call him before his time.”
So spoke my master; and he in haste stretched out
his hands, whose powerful grip Hercules once felt,
and grasped my leader.
Virgil, when he felt himself gripped, said to me:
“Come here, that I may hold you.” Then he made

136

139

one bundle of himself and me.
As Garisenda appears from below the leaning side
when a cloud passes above it so that it seems to fall:
so Antaeus appeared as I stood waiting to see him
bend over, and that was a time when I would have

142

145

wished to go by another road.
But lightly he set us down on the bottom that
devours Lucifer with Judas; nor did he remain bent
over,
but like the mast of a ship he raised himself.

NS
489

NOTES

1-6. One and the same . . . good reward: Compare the opening of Canto
24, on a change in Virgil’s attitude toward the pilgrim.
1-3. One and the same tongue . . .the medicine to me: Virgil functions
like conscience, reproaching (“‘stung’’) but also limiting the self-criticism (offering “medicine”): see Deut. 32.39: “I will strike, and I will heal”; and Tobit 13.2:

“For thou scourgest and thou savest: thou leadest down to hell, and bringest up
again.
4-6. the spear of Achilles and his father . . . good reward: Dante is alluding
to Ovid’s Art of Love (4.43—48):
Discite sanari, per quem didicistis amare,

una manus vobis vulnus opemque feret:
vulnus in Herculeo quae quondam fecerat hoste
vulneris auxilium Pelias hasta tulit.
[Learn to be cured from the same who taught you to love,
one hand will bring you both wound and remedy:
having once wounded the enemy, the son of Hercules (Telephus),
the Pelian spear brought help for the wound.]
According to the myth, only Achilles’ spear could heal a wound it had inflicted.
The troubadors and later medieval poets understood Pelias as a reference to Peleus,
Achilles’ father, rather than to Mount Pelion. The first of a series of epic references in the canto.

7-11. turned our backs . . . my sight did not pierce far ahead: The wayfarers enter what seems a large plain, which, according to 30.86—-87, must be
something less than three miles in diameter.
10. less than night and less than day: Twilight; for possible meanings of
this time of day, see the note to 34.5.

14-15. drew my eyes ... following its path backward: The pilgrim’s
curious backward following of the sound of the horn perhaps echoes the Song of
Roland (lines 1765-67), when the sound of Roland’s tardy horn blasts finally
reaches the main army, recalling them: “The horn could be heard far away:
Charles heard it, going through the passes . . . so did the Franks hear it.”

16-18. After the dolorous rout ... his horn so terribly: According to
the Song of Roland, when Charlemagne’s rear guard, led by Roland (Orlando)

490

Notes to Canto 31

and Oliver, is ambushed in the pass of Roncesvalles, Roland delays signaling for
help until too late to save his companions, who are slaughtered to a man (see
32.122 and note). The deaths of Roland, Oliver, Turpin, and others signal the
end of “the holy company,” the peers or paladins of France, as in line 1735: “Oi
nus defalt la leial cumpaignie” [Today we lose the loyal company] (see line 71
and note).

20-21. many high towers . . . what city is this: The appearance of a city
recalls the approach to the city of Dis; compare 9.67—72. Dante’s word for “city”
here (terra) also means “earth” (see also the notes to lines 31—43, 120-21).
22-26. Because your sight traverses . . . deceived by distance: Dronke
(1986) found an interesting parallel in the famous treatise on optics by Witelo
(thirteenth century), who gives the example of a tower seen through “murky
air” in twilight, as a classic instance of visual misjudgment (see Purg. 29.47—53).
31-44. not towers ... the horrible giants: The pilgrim’s error transforms
the giants into the towers of a city, and this error informs the simile in line 40.
Note that “towered” in line 43 may also be taken transitively, meaning that the
giants crown the bank with towers and thus are towers. Allegorically, both giants and towers traditionally stand for pride: see Wisdom 14.6: “from the beginning . . . when the proud giants perished,” and Augustine, City ofGod 16.3:
“Therefore he [Nimrod] with his people began to erect a tower against the Lord,
by which his impious pride was signified.” See also lines 107, 121, and Additional Note 14.

32. in the pit ... from the navel downward: Note the parallelism of the
giants with Farinata, exposed “from the waist upward” (cf. King Lear 4.6.125—
26: “But to the girdle do the gods inherit,/ Beneath is all the fiend’s’’). For this
division of the body, see 17.19—24, 32.34, with notes, and Additional Note 2.

40-41. above
its
circling walls ...
towers: The small
fortress of Montereggione stands on a low
hill eight miles northwest of Siena; fourteen
towers, reduced in

height since Dante’s

Figure 7. The walls of Montereggione.

day, still surmount the

walls (Figure 7). The walls and towers were built after 1260, when the Sienese defeated the Florentine Guelfs at Montaperti; when the emperor Henry VII marched
toward Florence in 1312, Montereggione harassed his movements.
Nearly circular, with towers evenly spaced, Montereggione is compared to

491

Inferno

the last redoubt of Hell, imagined as a city, Dis (8.68), with outer walls (Cantos

8 and 9), defensive ditches (Malebolge) around the central fortress (the pit of
Cocytus with its giant-towers), and Satan at the lowest point of the central pit
(the “tower”, all upside-down (see 18.10-18 and 34.6-7, with notes).
44. Jove still threatens . . when he thunders: A reference to the classical
war of the giants against the gods, when the giants attacked Olympus (see the
note to lines 94-95). Jupiter’s name of the “thunderer” (tonans) had been a standard epithet for the Christian God in Christian Latin poetry from the time of
Prudentius (fourth century) (see 14.52—60 and note, also line 92).
49-51. Nature ... such instruments: Dante takes the size of the giants to
be historical, on the basis of Gen. 6.4:

Now giants were upon the earth in those days. For after the sons of God
went in to the daughters of men, and they brought forth children, these

are the mighty men of old, men of renown.

This verse was the basis of the traditional euhemeristic interpretation (see
Baruch 3.26—28). The giants no longer exist because Nature, God’s minister,

stopped fashioning them, depriving Mars of such essecutoni [literally, executors].
55. where sharpness of mind . . . evil will and power: See Anistotle, Politics 1.1.1253a: “just as man is the best of the animals if perfected in virtue, so, if
he is separated from law and justice, he is the worst of all, for he owns the weapons of reason.” The combination of malice, destructive violence, and misused

intelligence is an argument for the last portion of Hell being the zone of “mad
brutishness” (see 11.82—83, with notes).
59. the pine cone of Saint Peter: The bronze pine cone, now about thirteen feet high, may once have stood near the Campus Martius in Rome (in Saint
Peter’s in Dante’s time, it is now in the Belvedere Gardens).

60. to that proportion were his other bones: Reckoning the size of giants
from their “remains” was a traditional puzzle; Augustine reports finding a human tooth 100 times normal size (City of God 15.9). Dante’s recourse to subjective factors in measurement (cf. “seemed as long and broad”’) make calibrations
pointless; the numerous stated measurements in lower Hell (the size of Hell itself, of the individual bolge, of the giants, of Satan) are not consistent (Gilbert

1945; Kleiner 1989; Kirkham 1990). The giants’ disproportion here may itself
be a judgment: they are out of scale, like the pine cone Dante uses to measure
them: see Aristotle (Ethics 5.3.1131b16): “the just is the proportional, the unjust
is what violates the proportion.” See also lines 64, 83, 84, and 113.

61. his apron from the waist down: Dante’s metaphor uses the biblical word,
perizoma [apron], for the fig leaves that Adam and Eve used after the Fall to con-

492

Notes to Canto 31

ceal their sexual parts (Gen. 3.7). Along with pride, the giants embody a rebellious sexuality: Gen. 6.4 was sometimes taken to mean that the rebel angels mated
with women to produce giants; in Vergil (Aen. 6.580) the giants are the spawn
of earth (Titania pubes: the “young,” but also the “genitals,” of Earth); the crime
of the giant Tityos was his attempt to rape Latona, the mother of Apollo and
Diana (Servius on Aen. 6.595), while for Fulgentius and the mythographic tradition, Antaeus signifies the rebellious sexual libido, because of his contact with
the earth (Rabuse 1961).
64. three Frisians ... thirty great spans: Dante relied on encyclopedia
accounts of Frisians as “a people of strength, tall of body, of fierce and harsh
spirit” (cf. Terlingen 1965).

66. where the mantle is clasped: Perhaps a reference to giants as “great and
mighty men”; only the rich wore cloaks.
67-81. Rapheél. . . unknown: The first giant named is Nimrod (Nembrotto),
king of Babylon (Gen. 10.9-10). Dante based the idea that Nimrod was a giant,
God’s adversary, and the builder of the Tower of Babel (Gen. 11.1—9), on
Augustine’s City of God (16.3—5), which followed the Old Latin translation of
the Greek Septuagint version: “Nebroth . . . began to be a giant on the earth.”
In the same passage, Augustine understood the Greek to mean “against the Lord.”
Dante’s version of the confusion of tongues (Gen. 11.7—9) in the De vulgari
eloquentia (1.7.7) is unusual:
For community of language remained only of those engaged in the same
activity; for instance, all architects had the same language, all those rolling
stones had the same language, all those preparing stones had the same language. . . . However many were the varieties of activity directed to the work,
by the same number of languages the human race is divided; and the more
highly placed their activity, the more rudely and barbarously they now speak.

This is the logic by which Nimrod, king and director of the entire undertaking,
is left entirely alone, with a language no one but he understands.

67. Raphél mai amécche zabi almi: Attempts to decipher Nimrod’s babble
(Guerri 1909; Lemay 1963) have not persuaded. As Plutus’s language (cf. 7.1)
seems a hash of Greek, Nimrod’s language sounds Semitic. Dronke (1986) points
to the tradition of invented languages, used largely for comic effect in Church
plays at Twelfth Night and Easter.
69. no gentler psalms befitted it: As the book of Psalms was taken as a model
for “the unity of a well-ordered city bound by concordant variety” (Augustine,
City of God 17.14), there is an implicit contrast with Babel (see the note to lines
70, 74).

493

Inferno

70, 74. Foolish soul, befuddled soul: On the Earthly City (Hell), see City of
God 16.4: “This city, which is called confusion, is that very Babylon . . . for
Babylon, interpreted, means confusion.”

71. be content with your horn . .. touches you: Nimrod’s expression is
of passion, not intellect. This is perhaps a final glance at Roland, whose pride
kept him from sounding the horn; see Song of Roland, line 1171: “you did not
deign to sound your horn.” Throughout the canto, Dante interweaves the giants with heroes of epic (Achilles, Roland, Scipio, and Hercules), “great and

strong men.” Achilles and Hercules are classical (often allegorized); Scipio and
Roland, historical (Scipio a Roman hero, Roland a Christian one).
76. evil thought: See Gen. 11.4, words attributed by Augustine to Nimrod:
“Come, let us make a city and a tower, the top whereof may reach to heaven:
and let us make our name famous before we be scattered abroad into all lands.”
79-81. not waste speech . . . unknown: Nimrod can neither understand nor
be understood by anyone (see the note to lines 67-81). The juxtaposition of the
confusion of Babel and the “speaking in tongues” of Pentecost was a commonplace of medieval biblical exegetes (cf. Bararisky 1989; see the note to line 69).

85. Who was the master to bind him: Dante’s reflection evokes passages
like Job 39.10: “canst thou bind the rhinoceros... ,” and 40.20—21; the “master” is presumably God (see 15.12), perhaps the archangel Michael.
86. one arm was held . . . behind him: The focus on the arm follows Vergil
(see Aen. 6.583—84, quoted in the note to lines 94-95); compare
Job 38.15: “the
high arm shall be broken.”
91. This proud one ... against highest Jove: This links the giants with
Lucifer’s attempt to rise above his creator (see 7.12 and 34.35, with notes) (see
the note to lines 94—95).

94-95. Ephialtes ... the gods afraid: The second giant the pilgrim sees is
Ephialtes: he and his brother were sent by their father Neptune to pile Mount
Ossa and Mount Pelion (in Macedonia) on top of each other in order to reach
Mount Olympus and displace the gods (Aen. 6.58384): “qui manibus magnum
rescindere caelum/ adgressi superisque Iovem detrudere regnis” [who with their
hands tried to destroy great Heaven, and to thrust Jove down from his high
realm].
On the gods’ fear of the giants, see the notes to 14.52-60 and 31.120—21.
98. immense Briareus: See Statius, Theb. 2.596: “immensus . . . Briareus.”
Virgil’s words (lines 103-5) indicate that Briareus is not hundred-handed (see
Aen. 10.565—66), but merely huge.

494

Notes to Canto 31

100-101. Antaeus . . . who speaks and is unbound: This third giant was not
among those who attacked the gods (see the note to lines 94-95), which perhaps
explains his not being bound. Dante read in Lucan (Pharsalia 4.593-660) how
Antaeus devastated crops, men, and beasts in the valley of Zama, in North Africa,

until Hercules arrived to challenge him: in order to conquer, Hercules had to keep
Antaeus from contact with his mother, Earth, who strengthened him: so Hercules

held him aloft in his arms and crushed him (see line 132).

107. shake a tower: A giant compared to a tower again (see the notes to lines
31-44, 136-38).
108. Ephialtes suddenly shook himself: Confirming Virgil’s judgment on
his ferocity, Ephialtes produces a metaphorical earthquake: ancient mythology
attributed earthquakes and volcanic eruptions to giants, bound in Tartarus or
under Mount Aetna after their defeat (cf. lines 91-95). The giants have so far in
this canto received historical (they truly existed), euhemerist (they signify powerful, violent men), and physical explanations (they signify earthquakes).
109.

I feared death: See 1.7 and 34.25, with notes.

115-29. O you ... before his time: Virgil’s speech to Antaeus, who does
not speak (though in line 101 he is said to be able to do so), is an aretalogy or
enumeration of his great deeds, followed by a petition: a formula associated with
praying to the gods (Dronke 1986). Virgil uses hyperbole or exaggeration (the
thousand lions, mentioned in Pharsalia 4.601—2; the notion that the giants would
have won if Antaeus had been present) to flatter Antaeus, then offers praise and

fame in return for setting them down in the bottom of Hell.
115-17.

the fortunate valley . . . turned tail: Zama, in North Africa, where

Publius Cornelius Scipio defeated Hannibal and broke the power of Carthage,
establishing Roman control of the Mediterranean. Zama is “fortunate,” and Scipio
inherited glory, because of this victory, which conferred on him the title
Africanus; like Lucan, Dante sees Scipio’s victory over Carthage as repeating
Hercules’ victory over Antaeus and thus inheriting its glory (Rabuse 1961).
120-21.

it seems some

still believe . . . victorious: Vergil, with a careful

double qualifier (cf. 12.42), alludes to Pharsalia 4.595—97: “caeloque pepercit,/
quod non Phlegraeis Antaeum sustulit arvis” [She (Earth) spared the gods when
she did not raise up Antaeus on the field of Phlegra]. For the giants associated
with Earth (Italian terra, meaning both “earth” and “city”), see the notes to 20-21,
31-44, 41, and 100-101.
123. where the cold locks in Cocytus: See 32.2—3, 23-24 and 34.52 and
117, with notes. In his Commentarii 1.10, Macrobius notes that Cocytus means
“sorrow.” See Additional Note 2.

495

Inferno

124. to Tityos or to Typhon: In classical myth, Tityos (see the note to line
61) was stretched out on a plain and bound (his body covered nine acres) while
a vulture fed on his liver (cf. Aen. 6.595—-97). Typhon was punished for attacking the gods by being buried under Mount Aetna, where his shakings appear as
volcanic activity (also called Typhoeus; see Par. 8.70).
129. if grace does not call him before his time: The remark links the pilgrim to Scipio Africanus the Younger, who Cicero’s Somnium Scipionis said would
have become the most important man in Rome but that his fate was cut short, for
Scipio died under mysterious circumstances in his fifty-sixth year, 129 B.c.; the
identification would be exploited by Boccaccio in his biography of Dante. See
the association of the pilgrim with the hero Hercules, in the note to line 132.
132. whose powerful grip Hercules once felt: The pilgrim now feels
Antaeus’s grip, as Hercules did when wrestling with him: Hercules’ grip was
fatal to Antaeus (see the note to lines 100-101). Although unbound, Antaeus
must obey the higher law that protects Virgil and the pilgrim.
This is the final reference to Hercules (most are implicit) in the Inferno (see
9.98-99, 12.67—69, 17.97, and 25.31—32, with notes) and the one in which the

pilgrim and the hero are most closely identified.
135. he made one bundle of himself and me: Literally, a sheaf or fascis,
also the symbol of Roman authority. There are a number of parallels here with
the passage on Geryon (17.7996) and the descent along Satan (34.70—81).
136. As Garisenda appears ... it seems to fall: Having begun with the
pilgrim’s confusion of the giants with towers, the canto concludes by comparing Antaeus to a leaning tower that appears to fall when a cloud passes behind it
(the “tower” does in fact “fall,” in that the giant bends over). The Garisenda

tower, built in Bologna in 1110 and still standing, though reduced in height, is
10.6 feet out of the perpendicular at its crest and 160 feet high; the Asinelli tower
next to it, 320 feet high, was built in 1109.

Dante supposed that the Garisenda had been built for private warfare; modern opinion is that it was built by the city. But most such towers in the Italian
cities were built by the warring clans; in Dante’s day, Bologna bristled with more
than 100 of them. By repeatedly associating his giants with towers, Dante makes
them symbols both of the pride that scaled Heaven (Satan; the tower of Babel;

Pelion on Ossa) and of the resistance to Roman law and authority implicit in
the prevalence of private war in northern and central Italy. Cantos 32 and 33,
which closely concern civil strife, also involve the tower motif. For the linguistic issue, see Ascoli 1990.

142. the bottom that devours Lucifer with Judas: For the implications of
“devour” here, see 34.55—56.

496

Notes to Canto 31

145. like the mast of a ship he raised himself: Compare s’ergea [he was
rising up], of Farinata (10.35). This is the next to last (see 34.48) of the references to ships in lower Hell (cf. 16.134, 17.100, 21.7-15, 22.12, 25.142,

26.100—142, 27.81, and 28.79; cf. 7.13-14). The full-rigged ship (masts, spars,
and sails) was often mentioned as a figure of pride (cf. Pluto [7.13-15] and the
note to 27.79-81).

497

CANTO

OZ

S’io avessi le rime aspre e chiocce
come si converrebbe al tristo buco
sovra ’| qual pontan tutte l’altre rocce,
io premerei di mio concetto il suco
piu pienamente; ma perch’ io non |’abbo,
non sanza tema a dicer mi conduco: °
ché non é impresa da pigliare a gabbo
discriver fondo a tutto l’universo,
10

né da lingua che chiami mamma 0 babbo.
Ma quelle donne aiutino il mio verso
ch’aiutaro Anfione a chiuder Tebe,

13

16

si che dal fatto il dir non sia diverso.
Oh sovra tutte mal creata plebe
che stai nel loco onde parlare é duro,
mei foste state qui pecore o zebe!
Come noi fummo git nel pozzo scuro
sotto i pié del gigante assai piu bassi,
e 10 mirava ancora a l’alto muro,

19

dicere udi’mi: “Guarda come passi!
Va si che tu non calchi con le piante
le teste de’ fratei miseri lassi.”

dee

Per ch’io mi volsi, e vidimi davante

2D

e sotto i piedi un lago che per gelo
avea di vetro e non d’acqua sembiante.
Non fece al corso suo si grosso velo
di verno la Danoia in Osterlicchi,

né Tanai 1a sotto ’| freddo cielo,
28

com’ era quivi; che se Tambernicchi
vi fosse su caduto, o Pietrapana,

non avria pur da l’orlo fatto cricchi.

498

GANT

O32

Ninth circle, Cocytus: Cain: traitors to kindred—brothers—Camiscion
de’ Pazzi, Sassol Mascheroni—Antenora: traitors to country or party:
Bocca del Duca, Buoso Donati—Ugolino and Archibishop Ruggieri

10

1}

16

If I had harsh and clacking rhymes such as befit
the dreadful hole toward which all other rocks point
their weight,
I would press out the juice from my concept more
fully; but because I lack them, not without fear do I
bring myself to speak;
for it is no task to take in jest, that of describing
the bottom of the universe, nor one for a tongue that
calls mommy or daddy.
But let those ladies aid my verse who helped
Amphion enclose Thebes, so that the word may not
be different from the fact.
Oh beyond all others ill-created throng who dwell
in the place of which it is hard to speak, better had
you here been sheep or goats!
When we were down in the dark well, far below

the giant’s feet, and I was still gazing at the high
wall,
19

22

25

28

I heard one say to me: “Watch how you step! Walk
so that you do not trample with your feet the heads of
your wretched weary brothers.”
I turned then and saw before me and beneath my
feet a lake to which icy cold gave the appearance of
glass and not of water.
So thick a veil was never made over its course by
the Austrian Danube in winter, nor by the Don under
its freezing sky,
as was there; and if Tamberlic should fall on it, or

Pietrapana, at its edge it would not even creak.

499

Inferno
31

34

oT,

E come a gracidar si sta la rana
col muso fuor de l’acqua, quando sogna
di spigolar sovente la villana,
livide insin la dove appar vergogna
eran l’ombre dolenti ne la ghiaccia,
mettendo i denti in nota di cicogna.
Ognuna in git tenea volta la faccia;
da bocca il freddo, e da li occhi il cor tristo

tra lor testimonianza si procaccia.
40

Quand’ io m’ebbi dintorno alquanto visto,

volsimi a’ piedi, e vidi due si stretti
43

46

49

che ’] pel del capo avieno insieme misto.
“Ditemi, voi che si strignete i petti,”
diss’io, “chi siete?” E quei piegaro i colli;
e poi ch’ebber li visi a me eretti,
li occhi lor, ch’eran pria pur dentro molli,
gocciar su per le labbra, e ’] gelo strinse
le lagrime tra essi, e riserrolli.
Con legno legno spranga mai non cinse
forte cosi, ond’ ei come due becchi
cozzaro insieme, tanta ira li vinse.

52

55

58

61

64

E un ch’avea perduti ambo li orecchi
per la freddura, pur col viso in gite,
disse: “Perché cotanto in noi ti specchi?
Se vuoi saper chi son cotesti due,
la valle onde Bisenzo si dichina
del padre loro Alberto e di lor fue.
D’un corpo usciro; e tutta la Caina
potrai cercare, e non troverai ombra
degna piu d’esser fitta in gelatina:
non quelli a cui fu rotto il petto e l’ombra
con esso un colpo per la man d’Artu,
non Focaccia, non questi che m’ingombra
col capo si ch’i’ non veggio oltre piu,
e fu nomato Sassol Mascheroni:
se tosco se’, ben sai omai chi fu.

67

E perché non mi metti in pit sermoni,

sappi ch’1’ fu’ il Camiscion de’ Pazzi,
e aspetto Carlin che mi scagioni.”
500

Canto 32

31

34

37

And as the frog sits croaking, with its muzzle out
of the water, at the season when the peasant woman
often dreams of gleaning,
the grieving shades, livid, were in the ice up
to where shame appears, playing the tune of the
stork with their teeth.
Each held his face turned down; from their
mouths the cold, from their eyes their wicked hearts

exact testimony among them.
40

When I had looked around myself a little, I looked

43

down at my feet and saw two so pressed together
that the hair of their heads was mingled.
“Tell me, you who so press your breasts together,”
I said, “who are you?” And they bent back their necks;

46

49

52

55

58

and when they had turned their sight up to me,
their eyes, which had previously been wet within,
dripped tears over their features, and the cold
pressed the tears into the eyes and locked them up.
Board with board clamp never bound so tight; and
they like two goats butted together, such anger
overcame them.
And one who had lost both ears to the freezing,
still with his face turned down, said: “Why do you
mirror yourself in us?
If you want to know who those two are, the valley
where the Bisenzio descends belonged to their father
Albert and to them.
From one body they were born; and you can
search through all Caina and not find a soul worthier
to be fixed in gelatine,

61

not him whose breast and shadow were pierced
by one blow from the hand of Arthur, not Focaccia,

64

67

not this one who so encumbers me
with his head that I cannot see any further, and
his name was Sassol Mascheroni: if you are Tuscan,
you know who he was.
And so you won’t have me make any more
speeches, know that I was Camiscion de’ Pazzi; and I
await Carlino to excuse me.”
501

Inferno

70

Poscia vid’ io mille visi cagnazzi
fatti per freddo, onde mi vien riprezzo,

73

e verra sempre, de’ gelati guazzi.
E mentre ch’andavamo inver’ lo mezzo
al quale ogne gravezza si rauna,
e io tremava ne l’etterno rezzo,

76

79

82

se voler fu o destino o fortuna,

non so, ma, passeggiando tra le teste,
forte percossi ’] pié nel viso ad una.
Piangendo mi sgrido: “Perché mi peste?
se tu non vieni a crescer la vendetta
di Montaperti, perché mi moleste?”
E io: “Maestro mio, or qui m’aspetta,
si ch’io esca d’un dubbio per costui;
poi mi farai, quantunque vorrai, fretta.”

85

Lo duca stette, e io dissi a colui,

88

che bestemmiava duramente ancora:
“Qual se’ tu che cosi rampogni altrui?”
“Or tu chi se’ che vai per l’Antenora
percotendo,” rispuose, “altrui le gote,
si che, se fossi vivo, troppo fora?”

91

“Vivo son 10, e caro esser ti puote,”
fu mia risposta, “se dimandi fama,

94

97

100

ch’io metta il nome tuo tra l’altre note.”
Ed elli a me: “Del contrario ho io brama.
Lévati quinci e non mi dar piu lagna,
ché mal sai lusingar per questa lama!”
Allor lo presi per la cuticagna
e dissi: “El converra che tu ti nomi
o che capel qui su non ti rimagna.”
Ond’ elli a me: “Perché tu mi dischiomi,
né ti diro ch’io sia né mosterrolti,

103

106

se mille fiate in sul capo mi tomi.”
Io avea gia i capelli in mano avvolti,
e tratti glien’ avea piu d’una ciocca,
latrando lui con li occhi in git raccolti,
quando un altro grido: “Che hai tu, Bocca?
non ti basta sonar con le mascelle,

se tu non latri? qual diavol ti tocca?”
502

Canto 32

70

Then I saw a thousand faces made doglike by the

73

fords.
And while we were walking to the center toward
which all weight collects, and I was trembling in the

cold, whence I shudder, and always shall, at frozen

eternal chill,
76

we

82

if it was wish or destiny or fortune, I do not
know, but, pacing among the heads, I struck my foot
hard in the face of one.
Weeping it scolded me: “Why do you pound me?
if you are not here to increase the vengeance for
Montaperti, why do you bother me?”
And I: “My master, now wait for me here, so that
I can be freed from a doubt by him; then you can

85

88

hurry me as much as you will.”
My leader stopped; and I said to that one, who
was still cursing violently: “Who are you, to
reproach others so?”
“Now who are you, to walk through Antenora
striking,” he said, “others’ cheeks, so that, if you were
alive, it would be too much to bear?”

91

94

97

100

103

“T am alive, and it can be precious to you,” was my
reply, “if you wish fame, that I place your name
among my other notes.”
And he to me: “The opposite is what I’m greedy
for. Get up from here, and stop pestering me, for you
flatter badly here in this swamp!”
Then I seized him by the scalp and said: “You will
have to name yourself or not a hair will be left up
here,
Then he to me: “Though you scalp me, I will not
tell you who I am nor show you, though you
fall on my head a thousand times.”
I had already wrapped his hair around my hand
and had torn out more than one tuft of it, he barking

106

with his eyes kept down,
when another shouted: “What’s wrong with you,
Bocca? isn’t it enough to play tunes with your jaws,
that you have to bark, too? What devil is tickling
your”

503

Inferno

109

“Omai,” diss’ io, “non vo’ che piu favelle,

malvagio traditor, ch’a la tua onta
io portero di te vere novelle.”
112

115

118

121

“Va via,” rispuose, “e cid che tu vuoi conta;

ma non tacer, se tu di qua entro eschi,
di quel ch’ebbe or cosi la lingua pronta.
E] piange qui l’argento de’ Franceschi:
‘To vidi,’ potrai dir, “quel da Duera
la dove i peccatori stanno freschi.’
Se fossi domandato: “Altri chi v’era?’
tu hai dallato quel di Beccheria
di cui sego Fiorenza la gorgiera.
Gianni de’ Soldanier credo che sia
piu la con Ganellone e Tebaldello,

124

127

130

133

136

139

ch’apri Faenza quando si dormia.”
Noi eravam partiti gia da ello,
ch’io vidi due ghiacciati in una buca,
si che l’un capo a l’altro era cappello;
e come ’] pan per fame si manduca,
cosi ’] sovran li denti a l’altro pose
la ’ve ’] cervel s’aggiugne con la nuca:
non altrimenti Tidéo si rose
le tempie a Menalippo per disdegno,
che quei faceva il teschio e l’altre cose.
“O tu che mostri per si bestial segno
odio sovra colui che tu ti mangi,
dimmi ’! perché,” diss’ io, “per tal convegno,
che se tu a ragion di lui ti piangi,
sappiendo chi voi siete e la sua pecca,
nel mondo suso ancora io te ne cangi,

se quella con ch’io parlo non si secca.”

504

Canto 32

109

“Now,” I said, “I don’t want you to say any more,
wicked traitor, for to your shame I will carry back true
news of you.”

2

“Get lost,” he replied, “and tell what you will; but

do not be silent, if you escape from here, about him
whose tongue was so loose just now.
115

He bewails the silver of the French here; ‘I saw,’

118

you can say, ‘him from Duera, down there where the
sinners keep cool.’
If you were asked, ‘Who else was there?’ beside

121

124

you is that Beccheria whose throat-piece Florence
sawed through.
Gianni de’ Soldanier I believe is over there with
Ganelon and Tebaldello, who opened Faenza when it
slept.”
We had already left him, when I saw two frozen
in one hole so that one head was a hat to the other;

127

130

133

136

139

and as bread is eaten by the starving, so the one
above put his teeth to the other, there where the
brain joins the nape:
not otherwise did Tydeus gnaw Menalippus’
temples in his rage, than this one did the skull and
the other things.
“O you who show by such a bestial sign your
hatred over him you are eating, tell me why,” I said,
“with this pact,
that if you justly complain of him, when I know
who you are and what his sin, in the world above I
shall repay you for it,
if that with which I speak does not dry up.”

NS

505

NOTES

1-12. If had... from the fact: As in 28.1—4, the poet disclaims the ability to
describe what he sees, in this case the bottom of Hell, the center of the cosmos.

The poet does indeed find “harsh and clacking rhymes,” but the question of how
language can “suit” a place of such horror remains through these final cantos.
1. harsh and clucking rhymes: As in English, the Italian for “clucking”
(chioccio, also used at 7.2) is onomatopoetic, like numerous other words in the
canto (see lines 9, 30, 35, and 105). That the significance of onomatopoetic words
is their sound, their acoustic “matter,” suits them to the dense material center of

the cosmos. Dante’s word rime means both “rhymes” and “verses” (see Convivio
4.2.12: rima is “all the speaking that falls in numbers and regulated time and
rhymed consonance’).
2-3. the dreadful hole . . . point their weight: The pilgrim approaches the
center of the earth, the focus of the weight of the geocentric universe. See Cicero,
Somnium Scipionis 4.9: “And that one that is ninth, in the middle—the earth—
is the lowest and does not move, and on it the weight of all the others is borne”
(see 11.6465, 31.123, 34.111, and lines 73-74).
4. press out the juice from my concept: An image from wine or oil making,
in which screw-driven presses squeeze the juice from the fruit; this is a well-established image of the Last Judgment (based on the imagery of Matthew 13, 20, and
24 and on Apoc. 14.18—20). Implicit here is the idea that the poet’s concept creates
pressure within him; note the relation of this pressure to the pressure driving tears
from the souls (lines 38-39), and the weight bearing down on the center of the earth.

7. to take in jest: Dante’s word for “jest” is gabbo, the name of a Provencal literary genre (the gab [mockery]) consisting, as the name suggests, of mockery, challenges, and boasting (Ahern in Lectura Dantis Californiana). The canto has much
sardonic “gallows humor.”
8. describing the bottom of the universe: “Describing” means both ‘“‘narrating in words” and “circumscribing,” as if with compasses, “as if the poet were
building the bottom of Hell in describing it” (Singleton); see “enclosing” in line 11.

9. a tongue that calls mommy or daddy: Describing Hell is no child’s play.
As this and the next canto will prove, it is also not a task for a tongue that speaks
the tender words between child and parent, expressing natural love; in these
cantos, natural human relations are banished. Such words as mamma and babbo

are in De vulgari eloquentia 2.7.4 explicitly excluded from the “tragic” style (see
the note to 21.2). See line 139 and note.

506

Notes to Canto 32

10. those ladies ... who helped Amphion enclose Thebes: In his second invocation to the Muses (“those ladies”; the first is 2.7), Dante alludes to

the poet Amphion, who, like Orpheus, charmed inanimate objects with the help
of the Muses. In the traditional story (found in Horace, Statius, Macrobius, and

Brunetto Latini), Amphion’s poetry causes the rocks to move to form the walls
of Thebes. Dante is also echoing Statius, who compares himself, as author of the
Thebaid, with Amphion (Achilleid 1.13); Dante, too, “must join rhyme to rhyme
in order to wall up the city of Hell” (Benvenuto). The motif of the ponderous
rocks enclosing Thebes repeats the theme of weight and pressure in lines 3-5.
12. so that the word ... from the fact: Platonic tradition (Timaeus 29b;
see Boethius, Consolation 3.12.38) recommends there be resemblance (Boethius
says “consanguinity”) between words and the things they describe.

15. better had you here been sheep or goats: That is, animals without
rational souls. See Matt. 26.24: “it were better for him, if that man had not been

born” (said of Judas, who was to betray Christ). For sheep and goats in the context of judgment, see Matt. 25.32—33 (and line 50). See also 19.132 and note.
17-18. far below ... the high wall: This suggests that the giants must be
standing on a ledge of rock well above the pit of Cocytus itself. Allegorically
speaking, to be “under the feet” of the giants means to be under the mass of
earth that the giants—“sons of the earth” —represent; the giants were compared
to a circle of walls (31.40—44).
21. your wretched weary brothers: Since Italian often omits possessives,
Dante’s de’ fratei [of the brothers] is ambiguous. The speaker may be claiming
brotherhood with the pilgrim, referring to the other damned as his “brothers,”
or, if he is one of the sons of Alberto of Mangona (lines 40—42), simply referring
to himself and his brother. In any case, the mention of brotherhood is ironic: it
is those who betrayed kinsmen who are punished here.

23-24. a lake ... not of water: Medieval science held that ice frozen long
enough became rock crystal; the cold was thought of as pressure, “squeezing
out the moisture” (Albertus Magnus; see Durling and Martinez 1990).
25-27. So thick a veil . . . freezing sky: Both the Danube and the Don (Tanai)
run into the Black Sea; the Danube through modern Austria and Hungary, the
Don through Ukraine. For Italians, these were typical far northern rivers, known
to freeze over in winter, mentioned as such by Macrobius (Commentanii 2.7.20).

28-29. if Tamberlic should fall on it, or Pietrapana: Tamberlicchi or
Tambernicchi is thought to be Mount Tambura in the Apuan Alps near Lucca,
in northwestern Tuscany; Pietrapana (or Petra Apuana) is in the same range. The
geography has shifted from the faraway Thebes, Danube, and Don, to the famil-

507

Inferno

iar (and see 33.30). The circle of the traitors is heavily populated with Tuscans
who were nearly contemporaries of Dante (see line 66).
The imagined falling of mountains recalls the attempt of the giants to pile Pelion
on Ossa (see the note to 31.94—95).
31-33. as the frog... dreams of gleaning: The simile strikes the only lyncal, bucolic note in these harsh cantos; for other bucolic similes, see 25.1—21
and 26.25-30.

34. up to where shame appears: The image of the souls buried in ice to
their necks (shame appears in the neck and head) recalls other “immersion” images
(see 8.53, 12.116—-17, 17.9, 31.32—33).
36. playing the tune of the stork: The stork’s name in Latin (aconia, pronounced kikénia) was originally onomatopoetic, reflecting the idea that storks
made sound by clacking their beaks (cf. Met. 6.96: “crepitante ciconia rostro”
[the stork with rattling beak]) (see lines 106—8 and 139, with notes).

37. held his face turned down: For this posture, expressing shame, see 25.121
and note; see 32.45, 53, and 105. Almost wholly immersed in the dense matter

of the center of the universe, these souls can barely lift their faces upward in the
typically human attitude.
38-39. from their mouths . . . exact testimony among them: The chattering of teeth is the testimony exacted by the cold, the weeping is that exacted
by their guilt; the souls are testifying before each other (tra lor). The emphasis on
eyes and mouth will dominate the canto. The passage establishes a relation between the cold and the force of the traitors’ grief: the external cold and pressure
lock in expression, while the internal pressure of grief squeezes it out: the souls
are pressed between the two. The cold is of course also the coldness of heart (the
“stony heart” of Ezek. 11.19 and 36.26) that made them traitors.

41. Ilooked down at my feet: The attitude of the pilgrim’s head now matches
that of the traitors.
41-42. two ... the hair of their heads was mingled: See Statius, Theb.
12.385—86: “amplexu miscent avide lacrimasque comasque” [embracing, they
greedily mingle both tears and hair]. In Par. 32.68—72, Esau and Jacob (for Augustine, archetypes of the two cities) are said to be distinguished by the color of
their hair (as in Gen. 25.25).
43. you who so press your breasts together: Gmelin calls lines 43-48 a
“parodic love-kiss” (also describing 25.54). In many medieval illustrations of the
zodiac, the Twins of Gemini (often identified as Castor and Pollux) were represented embracing; Castor and Pollux were emblems of fraternal love, as the

508

Notes to Canto 32

Theban brothers were of fraternal hatred (see the note to 26.52-54). See Paolo
and Francesca, the first paired souls in Hell, whose destiny was sealed by a kiss in
5.136—38 (cf. lines 58, 61-62 and notes).

47-50. and the cold . . . so tight: A prime example of the idea of cold exerting pressure.
48. locked them up: The antecedent of “them” (li) is “eyes” in line 46.

49-50. Board with board . . . so tight: A brilliant example both of the violent
harshness invoked in lines 1-12 and of spatial construction: in normal word order, the logic is spranga non cinse mai legno con legno cost forte [clamp never bound
board with board so tightly], but the inversion makes the two words for “board”
contiguous (legno legno), surrounded by con . . . spranga (as if “with . . .a clamp”).
51. they like two goats butted together: For the goat signifying the reprobate, see line 15 and note. In Theb. 4.397—400, the duel of Eteocles and Polynices

is foreseen in terms of a fight between bulls:

. .. Similes video concurrere tauros;
idem ambobus honos unusque ab origine sanguis
ardua conlatis obnixi cornua miscent
frontibus alternaque truces moriuntur in ira.
[I see matching bulls run at each other;
alike in honor, and of one blood,

their brows colliding, they mingle proud horns as they strive,
and, savage in mutual rage, they die.]

54. Why do you mirror yourself in us: Often taken in a weak sense (“why
do you stare?”); but reference to the glassy ice (line 24) and to the pilgrim’s
imminent imitation of the traitors’ violence (lines 98-105) make the reference
much richer (see the note to 30.131-32).
56-57. where the Bisenzio descends . . . and to them: The Bisenzio flows
into the Arno near Signa, ten miles downriver from Florence; in its valley were

located Vernia and Cerbaia, castles belonging to Count Alberto of Mangona.
The old commentators say that Count Alberto’s two sons, Napoleone and
Alessandro, fought over their inheritance and ultimately killed each other (date
uncertain, between 1282 and 1286). In 1280, the brothers had been formally

reconciled, exchanging the kiss of peace (see line 43 and note).
58. From one body they were born: The expression compresses the brothers back to their single origin; compare the note to line 51, and Theb. 11.407-8
on the duel of Eteocles and Polynices: “stat ... unius ingens/ bellum uten”
[behold . . . the great strife of a single womb].

509

Inferno

58. Caina: Named by Francesca in 5.107 as the destination of her killer (her
husband Gianciotto), Caina is named for Cain, who killed his brother Abel out

of envy and was exiled, branded with a mark to prevent anyone from killing
him (Gen. 4.8-15) (see the note to 10.67-69). For Augustine, Cain was the
founder of the Earthly City of ambition, rivalry, and fratricide: in this sense, Caina
is part of the foundation of Hell itself.

60. a soul worthier to be fixed in gelatine: Gallows humor: the ice is like
jellied aspic (these words [gelo, gelatina, jellied] are all derived from Latin gelu [frost,
cold]), and the speaker adopts an inverted criterion of worth among the “worst
souls in Hell” (see line 69 and note; 33.124 and note).

61-62. him whose breast . . . the hand of Arthur: Dante refers to the prose
Mort le roi Artu [Death of King Arthur] (conclusion of the Vulgate Cycle, to
which belongs the Lancelot, the book read by Paolo and Francesca; see 5.127—28
and note). In the Mort, Arthur kills Mordred with a savage lance thrust: “and the
story says that, after the lance was removed, a ray of sunlight passed through the
wound. .. .” Officially Arthur’s nephew, Mordred was in fact Arthur’s son by
his sister Morgan le Fay; he betrayed Arthur by attempting a coup d’état while
Arthur was in France, warring upon Lancelot.
63. Focaccia: Vanni de’ Cancellieri of Pistoia, said by the early chroniclers to
have murdered his father or uncle. He was blamed by the Florentines as the
originator of the division between Whites and Blacks.
63-64. who so encumbers me with his head: The souls are obstacles and
encumbrances to one another (as they are literally stumbling blocks, “scandals,”
for the pilgrim; see line 78). Compare Master Adam, his sight blocked by his
belly (30.123), and the Pisans (33.29—30).
65. Sassol Mascheroni: A member of the Florentine family of the Toschi; he
murdered his uncle’s only son for the sake of an inheritance, which fell to Sassolo

when the uncle died shortly thereafter. He was punished by being rolled through
the city in a barrel full of nails, and then beheaded (l’Anonimo).
68. Camiscion de’ Pazzi: Alberto or Umberto Camiscione, one of the Pazzi
of the Valdarno; he is said to have killed his kinsman Ubertino for his castles.

69. I await Carlino to excuse me: This soul will be “excused” because Carlino
de’ Pazzi, also a relation, will be so much worse. Dino Compagni (Chronicle 2.28)

reports that Carlino, holding a fortress for the White Guelfs, betrayed it for money,
in a move that undermined the White exiles’ 1302 campaign (see Petrocchi 1984)
(cf. the note to 24.142-50).

510

Notes to Canto 32

70. faces made doglike: Dante’s word here (cagnazzo) is obscure. It seems to
mean “purple,” the color of a dog’s lips and nose (for other dog imagery, see
line 105 and 33.78); for the devil named Cagnazzo, see the note to 21.118-23.

72. frozen fords: The pilgrim now passes from Caina to the next zone,
Antenora (see line 88). Commentators note that Dante’s putting two lists of five
persons each in this canto (lines 55-69, 116-23) recalls a technique of the sirventese,
described in Vita nuova 6, which lists names of contemporary persons (cf. “Io
son venuto al punto de la rota,” lines 53-58).
76. wish or destiny or fortune: Recalls 15.46; note the addition of “wish”
to the usual formula.

78-123. I struck my foot . . . Faenza when it slept: This remarkable episode, with the pilgrim tearing out the hair of a traitor who will not identify himself,
is a main focus of the canto. With the pilgrim’s betrayal of brother Alberigo
(33.109-50), it is the most striking instance in the Inferno of the pilgrim’s becoming involved in the sins he is visiting. It does not follow, however, that the

vengeance meted out is unjust; the pilgrim’s role is suited to the place where
pity is dead, among those who have violated all bonds.
The episode also explores the pilgrim’s (and the poet’s) deep identification
with the factional politics of his day. He acts on his own (82-85) and is taken for
one of the dead traitors (90) or as the avenger (80-81) of the treachery that decided a particularly bloody battle (Montaperti; see 10.32—33 and 85-87, with
notes); he is even taken for a devil (108; cf. 33.110—11).
78. I struck my foot: This kick (cf. lines 19-21) makes the traitor’s head a “stumbling block,” a “scandal” (see 28.35, with note, and Matt. 13.41). The kick also

recalls the blow on the cheek the Gospel urges us to forgive (Matt. 5.39). The
principles of love and retaliation are sharply juxtaposed in the next canto.
80-81. vengeance for Montaperti: Not named until line 106, the speaker is
Bocca degli Abati, notorious for striking off the hand of the Guelf standard-bearer
at the decisive moment of the battle of Montaperti, causing the Guelf defeat.

Bocca, a Ghibelline, had remained in Florence after the expulsion of his party in
1258, pretending to sympathize with the Guelf cause.
87. Who are you, to reproach others: See Matt. 7.4: “How sayest thou to
thy brother: Let me cast the mote out of thy eye; and behold a beam is in thine

own eye?” See Additional Note 15.
88. Antenora: The second subdivison of the ice, for those who betray nation,

city, or party, is named after Antenor, the Trojan lord and companion of Aeneas.
In the tradition of Troy stories represented by the Roman de Troie, Antenor is a
traitor who helps the Greeks take the city; tradition makes him the founder of Padua.

SY Ig

Inferno

91-94. I am alive . . . what I’m greedy for: Dante offers this traitor a bargain or pact, to exchange fame for his revelation of his identity; the soul violently rejects it (see the note to line 135).

97-105. Then I seized ... eyes kept down: Dante’s canzone “Cosi nel
mio parlar voglio esser aspro,” one of the rime petrose or “stony rhymes,” lines
66-78, imagines seizing the lady by the hair and making violent love to her (see
Durling and Martinez 1990). Other echoes of these poems, which use harsh
rhymes to invoke the hardness of crystal and risk the peril of petrifaction by a
Medusa-like lady, occur in lines 1-12 and 22-23.
106-8. What’s wrong . . tickling you: Bocca, whose name means “mouth”
(note the emphasis on all the sounds he makes), is betrayed by another of the
traitors.
113-23. do not be silent . . . when it slept: Bocca, his name revealed, takes
his own revenge (and dictates some of the poem), revealing the identities of five
more traitors, like Camiscione in lines 55—69.

116. him from Duera: Buoso da Duera of Cremona. During the campaign
of Charles of Anjou against Manfred (1265; see 28.16 and note), Buoso used
French gold to bribe the Marchese Pallavicino and the Lombard Ghibellines to
allow the passage of the French troops toward Parma, “because of which the
people of Cremona, in a fury, destroyed the lineage of those of Duera” (Villani,
Chronicle 7.4).

117. where the sinners keep cool: The expression star fresco [to be in for it]
may have already been proverbial in Dante’s day; it has been so ever since.
119.

that Beccheria: Tesauro di Beccheria of Pavia, abbot of Vallombrosa and

papal legate in Florence for Pope Alexander IV. After the Ghibellines were expelled in July 1258, he was seized by the Florentines on charges of conspiring
with the exiles. Although many doubted his guilt, he was tortured and beheaded;
the Florentines were excommunicated by the pope.
121. Gianni de’ Soldanier: After the defeat of Manfred in 1266, the Florentine

Gianni de’ Soldanieri became a Guelf in order to secure power (Villani, Chronicle
7.14). The Soldanieri were an old Ghibelline family that suffered heavily in the
proscriptions of 1302, which included Dante.
122. Ganelon: With Judas, the archetypal medieval traitor. According to the Old
French Song of Roland, Ganelon, Roland’s stepfather, was bribed by the Saracen

king Marsilio (at Saragossa) to betray his stepson and the whole rear guard of
Charlemagne’s army, causing the massacre of Roncesvalles (see 31.16—-18 and notes).
After the battle, Ganelon was tried, found guilty, and torn apart by four horses.

512

Notes to Canto 32

122. Tebaldello: A member of the Ghibelline Zambrasi family of Faenza; he
avenged a private grudge against the Lambertazzi, a Bolognese family that had
taken refuge there after their expulsion from Bologna in 1274. On the morning
of November 13, 1280, Tebaldello opened the gates of Faenza to the Bolognese
Guelfs, who entered the city and massacred their enemies.
125. two frozen in one hole: At close quarters, like Napoleone and Alessandro
(line 41). A series of puns, focused on the mouth, speech, and eating, links Dante’s
word for “hole,” buca (in Latin, “mouth’’?), Bocca’s name (106), and the first

word of the next canto (33.1), “mouth” (bocca).
127.

as bread is eaten by the starving: The verb here, manduca, is identical

with the vulgar Latin manducare, used in the New Testament of the Eucharistic
meal (see Luke 22.11, 15; John 6.54) (see 33.59-63 and notes). For cannibalism
and “mad bestiality,” see the note to 11.81-83.

129. there where the brain joins the nape: Dante’s word (nuca) is an Arabic medical term for the point where the brain joins the spinal marrow in the
vertebral column (Nardi 1944).
130-31. not otherwise did Tydeus ... in his rage: See Theb. 8.745—-64:
dying of a wound from Menalippus’s spear, the hero Tydeus asks for the head
of his killer, whom Tydeus has also cut down with a spear-cast. For him,
Menalippus’s severed head is a version of the Medusa: the mirror showing him
his own death (see the note to 33.55—-57). When it is brought to him, Tydeus,
goaded by the Fury, falls on it and gnaws at it, just as Minerva is bringing the
laurel wreath to honor his valor (8.760—61): “atque illum effracti perfusum tabe
cerebri/ aspicit et vivo scelerantem sanguine fauces” [she gazes at him, soaked
with gore from the shattered brain, defiling his mouth with living blood]. She
turns away. Tydeus’s hatred drives off his “immortal glory” (note cappello, line
126, which can mean “wreath”).
130, 134. did... gnaw... you are eating: In both cases, Dante uses the
reflexive pronoun (si rose, ti mangi), emphasizing the ferocity of the eater.
133. such a bestial sign: The expression “bestial sign” is an oxymoron, since
beasts, lacking reason, are not able to signify.

135. with this pact: Instead of the fame he offered Bocca, here the pilgrim
promises infamy for the eater’s enemy. Dante’s word for “pact” is convegno [convention] (cf. Shoaf 1988).
139. if that with which I speak does not dry up: If his tongue does not
dry—that is, if he stays alive. References to the mouth or to speech have been
frequent in this canto (see lines 6, 9, 14, 36, 38, 107-8, 115, and 116).

513

GANTIO

19S

La bocca sollevo dal fiero pasto
quel peccator, forbendola a’ capelli
del capo ch’elli avea di retro guasto.
Poi comincid: “Tu vuo’ ch’io rinovelli
disperato dolor che ’] cor mi preme
gia pur pensando, pria ch’io ne favelli.
Ma se le mie parole esser dien seme
che frutti infamia al traditor ch’i’ rodo,
10

13

16

a9

parlare e lagrimar vedrai insieme.
Io non so chi tu se’ né per che modo
venuto se’ qua git; ma fiorentino
mi sembri veramente quand’io t’odo.
Tu dei saper ch’i’ fui conte Ugolino,
e questi é l’arcivescovo Ruggieri:
or ti diro perché i son tal vicino.
Che per l’effetto de’ suo’ mai pensieri,
fidandomi di lui, io fossi preso
€ poscia morto, dir non é mestien;
pero quel che non puoi aver inteso,
cioé come la morte mia fu cruda,
udirai, e saprai s’e’ m’ha offeso.

22

25

Breve pertugio dentro da la muda
la qual per me ha ’] titol de la Fame,
e che conviene ancor ch’altrui si chiuda,
m’avea mostrato per lo suo forame

piu lune gia, quand’ io feci ’] mal sonno
che del futuro mi squarcio ’1 velame.
28

Questi pareva a me maestro e donno,
cacciando il lupo e ’ lupicini al monte
per che i Pisan veder Lucca non ponno.

514

CANTO.359
Antenora, continued: Ugolino’s account of his death—denunciation
of Pisa—Ptolomea: traitors to guests: Brother Alberigo—denunciation
of Genoa

That sinner lifted up his mouth from his savage
meal, wiping it on the hairs of the head he had
wasted from behind.
Then he began: “You wish me to renew desperate
grief that already presses my heart merely thinking,

before I speak of it.

10

13

16

But if my words will be seed to bear the fruit of
infamy for the traitor I gnaw, you will see me speak
and weep together.
I know not who you are nor in what manner you
have come down here; but truly, you seem to me a
Florentine when I hear you.
You are to know that I was Count Ugolino and
this is the Archbishop Ruggieri: now I will tell you
why I am such a neighbor to him.
That by effect of his evil thoughts, trusting him, I
was taken and then killed, there is no need to say;

19

22

but what you cannot have heard, that is, how

cruel my death was, you shall hear, and you shall
know if he has injured me.
A small aperture within that mew which because of
me has the name of Hunger, and where others must
still be shut,

20)

28

had shown me through its opening several moons
already, when I dreamed the evil dream that rent the
veil of the future for me.
This man appeared to me master and lord,
hunting the wolf and his little cubs on the mountain
for which the Pisans cannot see Lucca.

15:

Inferno

oall

34

Shy

40

Con cagne magre, studiose e conte
Gualandi con Sismondi e con Lanfranchi
s’avea messi dinanzi de la fronte.
In picciol corso mi parieno stanchi
lo padre e ’ figli, e con l’agute scane
mi parea lor veder fender li fianchi.
Quando fui desto innanzi la dimane,
pianger senti’ fra ’] sonno i miei figliuoli,
ch’eran con meco, e dimandar del pane.
Ben se’ crudel, se tu gia non ti duoli
pensando cio che ’] mio cor s’annunziava;

43

e se non piangi, di che pianger suoli?
Gia eran desti, e l’ora s’appressava
che ’] cibo ne soléa essere addotto,

46

49

52

55

e per suo sogno ciascun dubitava;
e io senti’ chiavar l’uscio di sotto
a lorribile torre, ond’ io guardai
nel viso a’ mie’ figliuoi sanza far motto.
Io non piangéa, si dentro impetrai:
piangevan elli; e Anselmuccio mio
disse: “Tu guardi si, padre! che hai?”
Percio non lagrimai, né rispuos’ io
tutto quel giorno né la notte appresso,
infin che l’altro sol nel mondo uscio.
Come un poco di raggio si fu messo
nel doloroso carcere, € i0 scorsi

58

per quattro visi il mio aspetto stesso,
ambo le man per lo dolor mi morsi;

ed ei, pensando ch’io ’| fessi per voglia
di manicar, di subito levorsi,
61

64

67

e disser: “Padre, assai ci fia men doglia
se tu mangi di noi: tu ne vestisti
queste misere carni, e tu le spoglia.”
Queta’mi allor per non farli piu tristi;
lo di e l’altro stemmo tutti muti:
ahi dura terra, perché non t’apristi?
Poscia che fummo al quarto di venuti,
Gaddo mi si gitto disteso a’ piedi,
dicendo: “Padre mio, ché non m/’aiuti?”
516

Canto 33

31

With lean, eager, alert bitches, he had put

34

Gualandi with Sismondi and Lanfranchi before his
face.
In brief course the father and his sons seemed to
tire, and I seemed to see the sharp fangs tearing their
flanks.

37

When I awoke before the dawn, I heard my sons,

40

who were with me, crying in their sleep and asking
for bread.
You are surely cruel if you do not already grieve,
thinking what my heart was announcing to me; and
if you are not weeping, about what do you usually

43

weep?
They were already awake, and the hour was

drawing near when our food used to be brought to
us, and each was afraid because of his dream;
46

and I heard them nailing up the door at the base
of the horrible tower, hence I looked into the faces

49

of my sons without a word.
I was not weeping, I so turned to stone within:
they were weeping; and my Anselmuccio said: “You
have such a look, father! what is it?’

52

55
58

61

64

Therefore I did not shed tears, nor did I reply all
that day or the night after, until the next sun came
forth into the world.
When a little ray had entered our dolorous prison,
and I perceived on four faces my own appearance,
both my hands I bit for rage; and they, thinking
that I must be doing it out of a desire to eat,
suddenly stood up
and said: ‘Father, it will be much less pain for us
if you eat of us: you clothed us with this wretched
flesh, so do you divest us ofit.’
I quieted myself then, so as not to make them
sadder; that day and the next we were all mute: ah,

67

hard earth, why did you not open?
After we had reached the fourth day, Gaddo
threw himself stretched out at my feet, saying: ‘My
father, why do you not help me?’
Diy,

Inferno

70

Quivi mori; e come tu mi vedi,

vid’ io cascar li tre ad uno ad uno
tra ’l quinto di e ’] sesto; ond’ io mi diedi,
73

gia cieco, a brancolar sovra ciascuno,

e due di li chiamai, poi che fur morti.
Poscia, pit che ’] dolor, poté ’] digiuno.”
76

Quand’ ebbe detto cid, con li occhi torti
riprese ’l teschio misero co’ denti,
che furo a l’osso, come d’un can, forti.

79

82

85

Ahi Pisa, vituperio de le genti
del bel paese la dove ’] si suona,
poi che i vicini a te punir son lenti,
muovasi la Capraia e la Gorgona
e faccian siepe ad Arno in su la foce,
si ch’elli annieghi in te ogne persona!
Che se ’] conte Ugolino aveva voce
d’aver tradita te de le castella,

non dovei tu i figliuoi porre a tal croce.
88

91

94

Innocenti facea |’eta novella,

novella Tebe, Uguiccione e ’] Brigata
e li altri due che ’] canto suso appella.
Noi passammo oltre, la ’ve la gelata
ruvidamente un/’altra gente fascia,
non volta in giu, ma tutta riversata.
Lo pianto stesso li pianger non lascia,
e ’] duol che truova in su li occhi rintoppo
si volge in entro a far crescer l’ambascia;

97

ché le lagrime prime fanno groppo
e, si come visiere di cristallo,

riempion sotto ’] ciglio tutto il coppo.
100

E avvegna che, si come d’un callo,

per la freddura ciascun sentimento
cessato avesse del mio viso stallo,
103

gia mi parea sentire alquanto vento;
per ch’io: “Maestro mio, questo chi move?

106

non é qua giu ogne vapore spento?”
Ond’ elli a me: “Avaccio sarai dove
di cio ti fara l’occhio la risposta,
veggendo la cagion che ’ fiato piove.”
518

Canto 33

70

There he died; and as you see me, I saw the three
fall one by one between the fifth day and the sixth;
and I,

73

already blind, took to groping over each of them,
and for two days I called them, after they were dead.
Then fasting had more power than grief.”

76

When he had said that, with eyes askance he took
the wretched skull in his teeth again, which were
strong against the bone, like a dog’s.
Ah, Pisa, shame of the peoples of the lovely land
where si is spoken, since your neighbors are slow to
punish you,
let Capraia and Gorgona move and make a barrier
at the mouth of Arno, so that it may drown every

19

82

85

88

Ql

94

Si.

person in you!
For if Count Ugolino was reported to have
betrayed your fortresses, you should not have put his

sons on such a cross.
Their young age, O new Thebes, made Uguiccione
and Brigata innocent, and the other two my song
names above.
We passed further, where the freezing rudely
swathes another people, not bent over but with
heads thrown back.
Weeping itself prevents weeping there, and the
sorrow that finds a block over the eyes turns back
within to increase the pain;
for the first tears make a knot and, like crystal
visors, fill all the cup below the brow.

100

103

106

And although, as if by a callus, because of the

cold every feeling had ended its stay on my face,
already I seemed to feel some wind; for which I:
“My master, who moves this wind? is not every
vapor extinguished down here?”
And he to me: “Soon you will be where your eye
will give you the answer, when you see the cause
raining down this breath.”

pig

Inferno

109

fel,

tS)

118

E un de’ tristi de la fredda crosta
grido a noi: “O anime crudeli
tanto che data v’é l’ultima posta,
levatemi dal viso i duri veli,

si ch’io sfoghi ’] duol che ’] cor m’impregna
un poco, pria che ’] pianto si raggeli.”
Per ch’io a lui: “Se vuo’ ch’i’ ti sovvegna,
dimmi chi se’, e s’io non ti disbrigo,
al fondo de la ghiaccia ir mi convegna.”
Rispuose adunque: “I’ son frate Alberigo,
i’ son quel da le frutta del mal orto,

che qui riprendo dattero per figo.”
21

124

127

130

133

136

139

“Oh,” diss’ io lui, “or se’ tu ancor morto?”

Ed elli a me: “Come ’] mio corpo stea
nel mondo su, nulla scienza porto.
Cotal vantaggio ha questa Tolomea,
che spesse volte l’anima ci cade
innanzi ch’Atropos mossa le dea.
E perché tu pit volontier mi rade
le *nvetriate lagrime dal volto,
sappie che, tosto che l’anima trade
come fec’ io, il corpo suo I’é tolto
da un demonio, che poscia il governa
mentre che ’] tempo suo tutto sia volto;
ella ruina in si fatta cisterna.
E forse pare ancor lo corpo suso
de l’ombra che di qua dietro mi verna;
tu ’] dei saper, se tu vien pur mo giuso:
elli € ser Branca Doria, e son piu anni
poscia passati ch’el fu si racchiuso.”
“To credo,” diss’ io lui, “che tu m’inganni,

ché Branca Doria non mori unquanche,

e mangia e bee e dorme e veste panni.”
142

“Nel fosso su,” diss’ el, ““de’ Malebranche,

la dove bolle la tenace pece,
non era ancora giunto Michel Zanche,
145

che questi lascio il diavolo in sua vece
nel corpo suo, ed un suo prossimano
che ’] tradimento insieme con lui fece.
520

Canto 33

115

And one of the grievers of the icy crust cried to
me: “O souls so cruel that you are given the last
place,
lift from my eyes the hard veils, so that I may
give vent a little to the anguish that gathers in my
heart, before my tears freeze up again.”
Therefore I to him: “If you wish me to help you,

118

tell me who you are, and if I do not extricate you,
may I have to go down to the bottom of the ice.”
He replied therefore: “I am Brother Alberigo, I am

109

112

he of the fruits of the evil orchard, and here I receive
121

124
127

130

133

136

139

a date for every fig.”
“Oh,” said I to him, “now are you already dead?”
And he to me: “How my body may fare up in the
world, I have no knowledge.
Ptolomea has this advantage, that often the soul falls
here before Atropos has sent it off.
And that you may more willingly shave the glassy
tears from my eyes, know that, as soon as the soul
betrays
as I did, its body is taken over by a demon, who
then governs it until his time has all revolved;
the soul falls down into this cistern. And perhaps
the body still appears up there of the shade who is
wintering here behind me;
you must know of him, if you have just now
come down here: he is ser Branca Doria, and years
have passed since he was closed in like that.”
“TI believe,” I told him, “that you are deceiving me,

for Branca Doria is not yet dead, and he eats and
drinks and sleeps and wears clothes.”
142

145

“Up in the ditch,” he said “of the Evil Claws, there

where the sticky pitch is boiling, Michel Zanche had
not yet arrived,
when this one left a devil in his stead, in his body
and that of a relative of his who committed the
betrayal along with him.

iat

Inferno

148

151

154

Ma distendi oggimai in qua la mano,
aprimi li occhi.” E io non gliel’ apersi;
e cortesia fu lui esser villano.
Ahi Genovesi, uomini diversi

d’ogne costume e pien d’ogne magagna,
perché non siete voi del mondo spersi?
Ché col peggiore spirto di Romagna
trovai di voi un tal, che per sua opra
in anima in Cocito gia si bagna,

157

e in corpo par vivo ancor di sopra.

Sais

Canto 33

148

But stretch out your hand to me now, open my
eyes.” And I did not open them for him; and it was
courtesy to treat him boorishly.

151

Ah, men of Genoa, foreign to every decent usage,

154

157

full of every vice, why have you not been
exterminated from the world?
For with the worst spirit of Romagna I found such
a one of yours, that for his deeds in soul he already
bathes in Cocytus,
and in the body he seems still alive up above.

as

ILD

NOTES

1-3. his mouth . . . from behind: The emphatic opening of the canto, focusing especially on the sinner’s “mouth” (bocca; cf. the note on 32.106-8),
follows immediately, without proem, on the pilgrim’s words at the end of Canto
32. The episode begins and ends with his “savage meal.” Note the featuring
of an etymological figure (capelli . . . capo) parallel to that in 32.126 (capo...
cappello).
4-75. You wish ... than grief: This “oration” of Count Ugolino (identified in line 13) is, with Francesca da Rimini’s and Ulysses’, probably the most
famous in the Comedy. With them, Ugolino is the classic model for the Ro-

mantic view of Dante’s damned as great-souled and rising above the background
of Hell and the theological categories of sin. In Ugolino’s case, the consuming
desire for revenge was seen as the expression of the father’s outrage at his
children’s suffering. Recent opinion has moved to another extreme: Russo
(1967) has argued that Ugolino’s term dolore [grief, pain] is to be interpreted
exclusively in terms of the desire for revenge; Barberi-Squarotti (1971) has
analyzed Ugolino’s speech as cynically contrived so as to obscure his guilt and
attract to himself the pathos of the children. A major issue has been the interpretation of line 75.
4-21. You wish . . . ifhe has injured me: The proem of Ugolino’s oration:
the painfulness of speaking (4-6); the greater intensity of his desire to bring infamy on his enemy (7-9); his identification of the pilgrim as familiar with the
publicly known events (10-18); and the announcement of his subject, his own
death (19-21).

4-6. You wish me ... before I speak of it: Ugolino is echoing the words
with which Aeneas begins his account of the fall of Troy (Aen. 2.3, 6-8, 12-13):
Infandum, regina, iubes renovare dolorem. .

.

quis talia fando
Myrmidonum Dolopumve aut duri miles Ulixi
temperet a lacrimis? . .
quamquam animus meminisse horret luctuque refugit,
incipiam.
[You bid me renew, O queen, unspeakable grief. . . .
speaking such things, who
of the Myrmidons or the Dolopes, or what soldier of cruel Ulysses
could refrain from tears? . . .
although my spirit shudders to remember and shrinks from this grief,
I will begin.]

524

Notes to Canto 33

The allusion suggests the larger political context of Ugolino’s tragedy. That
Ugolino’s grief “presses” (preme) on his heart continues the motif of pressure set
up by 32.1-12 (cf. especially 32.4: premerei [I would press]).

7-9. But if my words ... speak and weep together: The metaphor is
complex: it amounts to saying that Ugolino accepts the pact with the pilgrim,
who is to repeat his story among the living; at that point Ruggieri will gain infamy. Thus Ugolino’s words are to be the seed; the pilgrim’s memory, the earth
where it is planted; the text of lines 4-75, the plant; and infamy, the fruit. This
is the first of the series of references in the canto to the Sermon on the Mount
(Matthew 5-7) (see the note to line 120).

9. speak and weep together: Mouth and eyes. The phrase conspicuously
echoes 5.126, where Francesca says, “I will do as one who weeps and speaks.”
11-12.

a Florentine when I hear you: Like Farinata (10.25—27), Ugolino

has recognized the pilgrim’s city, not merely his region, by his speech.
13-18. I was Count Ugolino . . . no need to say: As a Florentine, the pilgrim must know of these events; they took place when Dante was in his early
twenties. Ugolino uses the past tense of himself (“I was’) and the present tense
of Ruggieri (“this is”), placing his own guilt in the past, Ruggieri’s in the present.
Ugolino della Gherardesca, count of Donoratico, was born in the first decades of the thirteenth century. Gmelin’s outline of events is succinct:
Ugolino was descended from an old Longobard Ghibelline family with
rich possessions in the region of Pisa. He had been the representative of
the Hohenstaufen in Sardinia, but after their downfall he returned to Pisa

and joined the Guelf party, in the hope of gaining control of Pisa with
their help. Later, when the Pisan Ghibellines under the leadership of the
archbishop, Ruggieri degli Ubaldini, became dominant again, he negotiated with them in order to drive out his own grandson Nino Visconti,

but he was treacherously lured into the city by the Archbishop, arrested,
and imprisoned. Dante, who was a friend of Nino Visconti (he placed
him among the negligent rulers in Purgatorio 8), could have heard the
entire story from him.
Ugolino, two of his sons, and two (according to some sources, three) grandsons
were imprisoned in July 1288 and probably died in March 1289. It is possible
but unlikely that Dante was badly informed about the identity of those in the
tower with Ugolino. The changes, making all four of them children (rather than
two grown men and two adolescents), are probably deliberate.
Dante places both Ugolino and Ruggieri (a typical pairing of lay and cleric,

B25;

Inferno

Guelf and Ghibelline) in Antenora (see the note to 32.88) as betrayers of party;
that they are not in Ptolomea (the third section of Cocytus, for traitors to guests)
is assured by the clarity of the transition in line 92.
15. such a neighbor: “Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself” (Matt.
22.37—40, 5.4348): another in the series of allusions to the Sermon on the Mount

(Matthew 5-7). The intimate enmity parodies the social bonds on which the
city rests.
22-25. A small aperture ... several moons already: That is, through a
small opening or window Ugolino had been able to see the waxing and waning
of the moon a number of times (it is not clear that he can see the sun). A mew
(Italian, muda) is a room for molting hawks, dark so as to keep them quiet; Buti
suggests that the city’s eagles had been kept there. After the deaths of Ugolino
and his children, the tower became known as the Torre della fame [Hunger
Tower]; it was used as a prison until 1318. This stone tower with a small win-

dow (like an eye) is a version of the image of the body as a prison (see the note

to 10.5859).

26-27. I dreamed the evil dream . . . for me: The most famous “rent veil”
is that of the Temple in Jerusalem, rent at Christ’s death (see the note to 12.31—45);
Ugolino’s language is biblical and apocalyptic. His assertion that the dream was
“evil” is discussed in Additional Note 15.
28-36. This man. . . tearing their flanks: Ugolino’s dream occurs just before
dawn (line 37), at the time for prophetic dreams (26.7—12). It shows Ruggieri as
master of the hunt for the wolf and his cubs (Ugolino and his sons), on Monte
Pisano or Monte San Giuliano, both between Pisa and (Guelf) Lucca (the recurrent motif of blocked sight; see the note to 32.63—64). The bitches recall those
of the infernal hunt in 13.124-29; Gualandi, Sismondi, and Lanfranchi were

powerful Pisan Ghibelline families. The dream sums up events so far and predicts Ugolino’s and his sons’ deaths; the dogs’ fangs repeat the motif of teeth.
Ugolino sees himself as a wolf, the traditional enemy of man.
38-39. [heard my sons. . . asking for bread: The Italian diminutive figliuoli
already suggests that the children are small; they are never represented as asking
for food while awake. This is another allusion to the Sermon on the Mount (Matt.
7.9-10).
40-42. You are surely cruel . . . usually weep: This highly rhetorical appeal to the pilgrim’s pity, belied by Ugolino’s own failure to weep (lines 49-50),

526

Notes to Canto 33

is a chief basis for the claim that Ugolino’s speech is cynically self-aggrandizing
(see the note to lines 4-75).
41. what my heart was announcing to me: Because of the importance of
the Annunciation (to Mary), Ugolino’s use of the term annunziava is laden with
irony.
45. each was afraid because of his dream: Each of the children, then, has

also had a dream, perhaps a prophetic one.
46-47.

[heard them. . . horrible tower: According to the chroniclers, not

only was the tower nailed up, its keys were thrown into the river.

47-50. hence ... they were weeping: The causal relation implied by the
Italian onde [hence] is extremely loose; Ugolino means, it would seem, that he
was so overwhelmed by the event that he is incapable of speaking: he can only
stare at the children. The contrast between his silent rigidity and their expressiveness is the focus of the account.
50-51. my Anselmuccio . . . what is it: Anselmuccio was the legal name of
Ugolino’s fifteen-year-old grandson (Ugolino is also a diminutive, of Ugo, but
still the count’s name). The use of the name here suggests that the affectionate
diminutive (-uccio) is used for a very small child, incapable of grasping the implications of events.
52. Therefore: Ugolino represents his silence here and later as the expression
of forbearance, since the only things he could say—expressions of his despair
and his hatred for Ruggieri—would only upset the children more (cf. line 64).

55-57. When a little ray ... my own appearance: The sun’s light makes
it possible for him to see the children’s faces. His “own appearance” (cf. Theb.
8.753, of Tydeus looking at Menalippus’s head: “‘seseque agnovit in illo” [and
he recognized himself in him]; see the note to 32.130—31) has several implications. It signifies the children’s family resemblance to himself; it suggests that he
can see the progress of their starvation, can read both his and their deaths inscribed in their faces. For this moment and the Medusa, see Additional
Note 15.
58. both my hands I bit for rage: Italian dolore, which we here translate as
“rage,” includes suggestions of sorrow, grief, anger, desire for revenge, and, here,

O27

Inferno

guilt. Ugolino’s first turning to stone and then biting his hands are stages of his
becoming what we find in Cocytus; see Filippo Argenti (8.62-63), who “turned
on himself with his teeth.” Of course, Ugolino’s biting his hands does express,
along with its other complexities, his hunger for justice against Ruggieri; compare with Matt. 5.6.
59-63. they, thinking . . . divest us of it: The children are represented as
not understanding their father’s agony because of their youth and innocence.
Lines 62-63 echo Job 1.21: “Naked came I out of my mother’s womb, and

naked shall I return thither: the Lord gave, and the Lord hath taken away. ...
blessed be the name of the Lord.” The commentators point out that their
offer of their flesh as food involves allusion to the Eucharist. See Additional
Note 15.
The Italian spogliare means both “to take away” and “to undress” (cf. 3.114).
Manicar [to eat], like manducare (32.127), is a familiar dialect word; in De vulgari

eloquentia 1.13.2, Dante identifies it as Florentine and excludes it from the “tragic”
style (cf. the notes to 32.112).

67. After we had reached the fourth day: The sun has risen, then, and the

inmates of the tower can see each other again.
69. My father, why do you not help me: As the commentators point out,
these words echo Jesus’ last words as reported by Matthew and Mark: “Eli, Eli,
lamma sabachthani, that is, My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?”
(Matt. 27.46).

70-72. There he died . . . and the sixth: Gaddo dies on the fourth day, the
others on the fifth and sixth days. Medieval readers would have been alert to the
fact that Christ’s death took place on the sixth day of the week.

72-74. I, already blind . . . after they were dead: Ugolino calls them for
two days: he lives, then, into the eighth day, when presumably he dies—
Macrobius had written that a man cannot live more than a week without food.
The commentators have seen the ironic parallel with the week of the Creation;
there is also a negative parallel with Christ’s resurrection, which took place on
the day after the Sabbath (in the Middle Ages the number eight was universally
associated with baptism and resurrection).

75. Then fasting had more power than grief: “Grief” translates dolor, which
includes the complexities noted at line 58. The line is ambiguous: his rage could
not kill him, but on the eighth day his hunger did; or: hunger overcame his

528

Notes to Canto 33

grief, and he fed on the children’s bodies. There has been much debate about
this line. See Additional Note 15.
76. with eyes askance: Ugolino’s eyes are torti [twisted], past participle of the
verb Dante uses of Ciacco in 6.91 to describe the characteristic oblique gaze of
envy and in 30.21 of doglike madness.
78. like a dog’s: The vivid image picks up the several comparisons of the souls
in Cocytus to dogs (32.70, 105, and 108), as well as the dogs of Ugolino’s dream.
Here part of the point is the adaptation of dogs’ teeth to grinding bones. The
wolf is implied also: Ugolino and Ruggieri are instances of homo homini lupus:
men who have become wolves to others.
79-90. Ah, Pisa ... my song names above: The poet’s calling down of
punishment on Pisa recalls God’s destruction of Sodom, not to speak of the
Flood. The method, flooding Pisa by blocking the mouth of the Arno with
the two small offshore islands of Capraia and Gorgona, imagines a closing in
of rock and the formation of a lake parallel to that of Cocytus or Thebes (see
32.10, with note). The names Capraia [Goat Island] and Gorgona seem to have
appealed to Dante for their association with the damned (who are goats to be
separated from the sheep; Matt. 25.33) and with the Medusa. He is remembering Christ’s words in Matt. 18.6: “But he that shall scandalize one ofthese
little ones that believe in me, it were better for him that a millstone should be

hanged about his neck, and that he should be drowned in the depth of the
sea” (see the note to 28.79). The next-to-last denunciation of an Italian city in
the Inferno (see lines 151-57).

80. the lovely land where si is spoken: In De vulgari eloquentia, Dante classifies the Romance languages on the basis of the word used for “yes” (cf. 18.61,
21.42); this was already traditional. The traitor, of course, says an everlasting
“

no.

”

85-88. For if Count Ugolino . . . on such a cross: While podesta of Pisa in
1285, Ugolino ceded several Pisan castles to Lucca and Florence (Guelf cities),

apparently with the intention—successful, in fact—of weakening their alliance
with Genoa against Pisa. Later the Pisan Ghibellines charged that this was done
treacherously. Even if true, the charge could not justify the killing of his sons
(porre a croce can mean simply “to torture,” but after line 69 the reference to Christ’s
cross is unmistakable).

88-90. Their young age ... my song names above: Uguiccione was a
son of Ugolino’s; Nino, called “il Brigata,” was a grandson. One should note

529

Inferno

that Dante’s denunciation of the starving of the children validates Ugolino’s
denunciation of Ruggieri (lines 7-9 and 19-21), as does God’s making him the
instrument of Ruggieri’s punishment.
The Italian juxtaposes two different senses of the word novello [new, young].
Pisa is a “new Thebes” because its wickedness rivals that of Thebes, the most

wicked city of antiquity; and it is a “young Thebes” in terms of the
mythographic tradition that identified it as a Theban colony (Zampese 1989).
For Dante’s references to the saga of Thebes, see 'the notes to 26.52—54, 30.1—
27; for denunciations of Italian cities, including Genoa, 33.151-57, see the

note tor 26:h—3.

91-93. We passed further . . . heads thrown back: In both Caina (32.31—
72) and Antenora (32.73—33.90), the souls can protect their eyes by lowering
their heads; they also face away from the wind. Now we enter Ptolomea, re-

served for those who have murdered guests.

94-99. Weeping itself ... below the brow: The exquisite painfulness of
the “crystal visors” is due in part to the fact that, as Dante knew, water expands
when it forms ice. This is a particularly uncomfortable version of the insistence
in these cantos on the idea of pressure. The tropological significance of the “crystal
visors” is probably that the malice and hatred of these sinners have blocked their
ability to see anything else; it is a continuation of the theme of blocked sight, a
version of the “beam” of the Gospel (Matt. 7.3): “And why seest thou the mote
that is in thy brother’s eye; and seest not the beam that is in thy own eye?” See
also Matt. 6.22—23: “The light of thy body is thy eye. . . . But if thy eye be evil
thy whole body shall be darkness. If then the light that is in thee be darkness: the
darkness itself, how great shall it be!” The note to line 148 discusses the probable source for the visors in the Gospel of John. As part of a helmet, the visors
refer ironically to the “armor of God” (Eph. 6.13—17), which includes “the helmet of salvation.”
104-5. who moves... extinguished down here: The pilgrim asks who—
rather than what—moves the wind (it is explained in 34.49-52). The accepted
theory of winds was that they resulted from the heat of the sun evaporating
moisture (hence “vapor’”) and from the consequent differences in temperature
(as in 9.67—68); earthquakes were caused by winds trapped underground
(3.131-33). But “down here” all heated air (“vapor”) is chilled (“extinguished,”
since the element of fire has been removed).
110-14. O souls so cruel ... freeze up again: In contrast with the ferocious energy of Ugolino, this last and most wicked soul is apparently suffering
so intensely that he entreats souls he supposes even more merciless than himself.

530

Notes to Canto 33

The swelling of the heart with sorrow and the gathering of tears are coalesced
here, as if the pressure on the eyes reaches the heart itself. The generative imagery (impregna [impregnates]) is continued in lines 118-20.

115-17. If you wish ... bottom of the ice: The pilgrim has already encountered Bocca degli Abbati’s resistance to revealing his identity (32.94-105).
His promise here is of course fraudulent, since he has realized that he and Virgil
will descend through the ice; his betrayal of the betrayer (lines 149-50) is already prepared; he will violate this pact (see the note to 33.149-50).
118-20. I am Brother Alberigo . . . every fig: Alberigo, a leading member
of the Manfredi of Faenza, a prominent Guelf family, was a frate godente (see the
notes to 23.103-8). In 1285 he invited to dinner several relatives from whom

he had formerly been estranged in a dispute over land; at the end of the meal,
his words “Vengan le frutta’” [Let the fruits come] were the signal for the assassins who then murdered his relatives, including one who tried to hide under

Alberigo’s cloak. Various phrases like “the fruits of friar Alberigo” became proverbial soon after, as did Dante’s “fruits of the evil orchard,” if it was not already
so when he wrote.
120. a date for every fig: Dates being more expensive than figs, the phrase
means “better than I gave” (cf. the proverbial phrase to give or receive “pan per
focaccia” [bread for shortbread]). Maintaining the fruit metaphor, Dante is making
scornful play on the name Alberigo as related to the word for “tree” (albero) and
draws on the Sermon on the Mount (Matt. 7.16—20), especially:
Do men gather grapes of thorns or figs of thistles? Even so every good tree
bringeth forth good fruit, and the evil tree bringeth forth evil fruit. .. .
Wherefore by their fruits ye shall know them.

121. are you already dead: Brother Albergo was still alive in the spring of
1302, in Ravenna, where he made a will; he seems to have died around 1307.

122-23. How my body . .. no knowledge: This sinner seems even more
ignorant of the present than is usual (see 10.100—108).
124-33. Ptolomea ... into this cistern: The name of this third division of
Cocytus is derived from the Ptolemy, king of Egypt, who permitted the murder
of his guest, the defeated Pompey the Great, possibly also from the Ptolemy of
1 Macc.

16.11-16, who murdered his father-in-law and two brothers-in-law

531

Inferno

when they were his guests. Dante’s bold imagining of a demon’s taking over the
body of these traitors is probably heterodox, but it draws on the account of
Judas in Luke 22.3: “And Satan entered into Judas,” as well as popular tradition
(see below).
126. Atropos: One of the three Fates; Clotho was said to spin the thread of
one’s life, Lachesis to measure it, and Atropos to sever it.

133. cistern: A cistern is a well or a reservoir for drinking water.
134-38.

perhaps the body .

. closed in like that: Branca Doria, mem-

ber of a famous noble family of Genoa, invited his father-in-law, Michele

Zanche, to dinner and had him killed along with those who accompanied him.
According to some, this took place in 1275; according to others, in 1290.
Michele Zanche was mentioned by Ciampolo as always talking about Sardinia
(22.8990).
135. wintering here behind me: Italian vernare can mean “to spend the winter,” but the phrase may be even more sardonic, since vernare can also mean “to

sing in the spring” (used of birds); there could be a reference to the “stork’s tune”
(32.36) of chattering teeth.
140-41.

Branca Doria . . . and wears clothes: Branca Doria outlived Dante;

he was still alive in 1325. Dante’s words seem to echo a phrase from Caesarius of
Heisterbach’s dialogue in which one interlocutor expresses surprise at the idea
that a certain Landgraf Hermann was possessed: “I did not think a human body,
without a soul, could eat, drink, and sleep” (cited in Biagioni 1957).

148. But stretch out your hand to me: What Brother Alberigo asks is an
analogue (like the pilgrim’s gesture toward Brunetto Latini in 15.29) of a gesture of Jesus—for instance, in Matt. 8.3 (of the healing of a leper): “and Jesus,
extending [extendens] his hand, touched him.” The allusion suggests that Dante
may have developed his idea of the crystal visors on the basis of the mud visor in
the healing of the man blind from birth: “[Jesus] spat on the ground, and made
clay of the spittle, and spread the clay on his eyes, And said to him, Go, wash in
the pool of Siloe. ... He went, therefore, and washed, and he came seeing”

(John 9.6-7).

149-50.

And I did not . . . to treat him boorishly: That is, to have light-

ened in any way the suffering of this wicked soul would have been a lapse; true

B32

Notes to Canto 33

cortesia (behavior appropriate to the court of a ruler, in this case, God) here requires what in other circumstances would be its reverse (the behavior of a peasant, a villano); cf. Met. 6.635: “scelus est pietas in coniuge Tereus” [compassion
toward her husband Tereus would be a crime].
151-57. Ah, men of Genoa ... up above: The denunciations of Italian
cities in the Inferno are listed in the note to 26.1—3; this is the last of them.

533

CANTO

34

“Vexilla regis prodeunt inferni
verso di noi; pero dinanzi mira,”
disse ’] maestro mio, “se tu 7] discerni.”

Come, quando una grossa nebbia spira
o quando |’emisperio nostro annotta,
par di lungi un molin che ’] vento gira:
veder mi parve un tal dificio allotta;
poi per lo vento mi ristrinsi retro
al duca mio, ché non li era grotta.
10

Gia era, e con paura il metto in metro,

la dove l’ombre tutte eran coperte,
e trasparien come festuca in vetro.
13

Altre sono a giacere; altre stanno erte,

quella col capo e quella con le piante;
altra, com’ arco, il volto a’ pié rinverte
16

Quando noi fummo fatti tanto avante
ch’al mio maestro piacque di mostrarmi
la creatura ch’ebbe il bel sembiante,

19

d’innanzi mi si tolse e fé restarmi,

22

ove convien che di fortezza t’armi.”
Com’ io divenni allor gelato e fioco,

“Ecco Dite,” dicendo, “ed ecco il loco

nol dimandar, lettor, ch’i’ non lo scrivo,

pero ch’ogne parlar sarebbe poco.
25

28

Io non mori’ e non rimasi vivo:
pensa oggimai per te, s’hai fior d’ingegno,
qual io divenni, d’uno e d’altro privo.
Lo ’mperador del doloroso regno
da mezzo ’] petto uscia fuor de la ghiaccia;
e piu con un gigante io mi convegno

534

CANTO

34

Judecca: traitors to lords and benefactors—Satan—Brutus, Cassius,
and Judas—descent past the center—climb to Purgatory

“Vexilla regis prodeunt inferni toward us;
therefore look ahead,” said my master, “to see if you
discern him.”
As, when a thick mist breathes, or, when our

hemisphere is all night, a mill appears from afar that
the wind is turning:
so I seemed to see such an edifice there; then,

because of the wind, I shrank behind my leader, for
10

13

there was no other shelter.
I was already—and fearfully I set it in meter—
where the shades were all covered, and they
appeared like straws in glass.
Some are lying; others are vertical, this with head
above, that with feet; some, like bows, turn their

16

faces toward their feet.
When we had moved so far ahead that it pleased
my master to show me the creature who had once
been beautiful,

19

he removed himself from in front of me and made
me stop, saying: “Behold Dis, and behold the place
where you must arm yourself with courage.”

22

How then I became frozen and feeble, do not ask,

25)

28

reader, for I do not wntte it, and all speech would be
insufficient.
I did not die and I did not remain alive: think
now for yourself, if you have wit at all, what I
became, deprived of both.
The emperor of the dolorous kingdom issued from
the ice at the mid-point of his breast; and I am more
to be compared with a giant

PEP)

31

che i giganti non fan con le sue braccia:
vedi oggimai quant’ esser dee quel tutto
ch’a cosi fatta parte si confaccia.

34

S’el fu si bel com’ elli é ora brutto,

Si)

40

43

46

49

e contra ’] suo fattore alzo le ciglia,
ben dee da lui procedere ogne lutto.
Oh quanto parve a me gran maraviglia
quand’ io vidi tre facce a la sua testa!
L’una dinanzi, e quella era vermiglia;
laltr’ eran due, che s’aggiugnieno a questa
sovresso ’] mezzo di ciascuna spalla
e sé giugnieno al loco de la cresta:
e la destra parea tra bianca e gialla;
la sinistra a vedere era tal, quali
vegnon di 1a onde ’] Nilo s’avvalla.
Sotto ciascuna uscivan due grand’ ali,
quanto si convenia a tanto uccello:
vele di mar non vid’ io mai cotali.
Non avean penne, ma di vispistrello
era lor modo; e quelle svolazzava,

si che tre venti si movean da ello;
ay?

55

58

61

quindi Cocito tutto s’aggelava.
Con sei occhi piangéa, e per tre menti
gocciava ’] pianto e sanguinosa bava.
Da ogne bocca dirompea co’ denti
un peccatore, a guisa di maciulla,
si che tre ne facea cosi dolenti.
A quel dinanzi il mordere era nulla
verso ’| graffiar, che talvolta la schiena
rimanea de la pelle tutta brulla.
“Quell’ anima 1a su c’ha maggior pena,”
disse ’] maestro, “é Giuda Scariotto,

64

che ’] capo ha dentro e fuor le gambe mena.
De li altri due c’hanno il capo di sotto,
quel che pende dal nero ceffo é Bruto—
vedi come si storce,

67

e non fa motto—

e l’altro é Cassio, che par si membruto.
Ma la notte risurge, e oramai
é da partir, ché tutto avem veduto.”
536

Canto 34

oH

34

37

than the giants with his arms: see now how great
must be the whole that fits with such a part.
If he was as beautiful then as now he is ugly,
when he lifted his brow against his Maker, well must
all grieving proceed from him.
Oh how great a marvel did it seem to me, when I
saw three faces on his head! One was in front, and
that was crimson;

40

43

46

49

the others were two, and they were joined to the
first above the midpoint of each shoulder, and came
together at the crest:
and the right one seemed between white and
yellow; the left was such to see as those who come
from beyond the cataracts of the Nile.
Beneath each one came out two great wings, such
as befitted so great a bird: sea-going sails I never saw
so large.
They did not have feathers; their mode was like a
bat’s; and he was fanning them, so that three winds

52

55

went out from him:
by them Cocytus was frozen. With six eyes he
was weeping, and down three chins dripped the
tears and the bloody slobber.
In each of his mouths he was breaking a sinner
with his teeth in the manner of a scutch, so that he

58

61

made three suffer at once.
To the one in front the biting was nothing next to
the clawing, for at times the spine remained all
naked of skin.
“That soul up there who has the greatest
punishment,” said my master, “is Judas Iscariot, with

his head inside, waving his legs outside.
64

Of the other two whose heads are below, he who

hangs from the black muzzle is Brutus—see how he is
convulsed, but does not say a word—
67

and the other is Cassius, who seems so powerfully

built. But the night is rising again, and now we must
depart, for we have seen everything.”

OL

Inferno

70

Ue

76

Com’ a lui piacque, il collo li avvinghiai;
ed el prese di tempo e loco poste,
e quando I’ali fuoro aperte assai,
appiglio sé a le vellute coste;
di vello in vello giti discese poscia
tra ’l folto pelo e le gelate croste.
Quando noi fummo 1a dove la coscia
si volge, a punto in sul grosso de l’anche,
lo duca, con fatica e con angoscia,

79

volse la testa ov’ elli avea le zanche,

e aggrappossi al pel com’ om che sale,
si che ’n inferno 1’ credea tornar anche.
82

“Attienti ben, ché per cotali scale,”
disse ’] maestro, ansando com’ uom lasso,

85

88

“conviensi dipartir da tanto male.”
Poi usci fuor per lo foro d’un sasso,
e puose me in su l’orlo a sedere;
appresso porse a me l’accorto passo.
Io levai li occhi e credetti vedere
Lucifero com’ io |’avea lasciato,

91

94

97

e vidili le gambe in su tenere;
e s'i0 divenni allora travagliato,
la gente grossa il pensi che non vede
qual é quel punto ch’io avea passato.
“Leévati su,” disse ’] maestro, “in piede:

la via € lunga e ’] cammino é malvagio,
e gia il sole a mezza terza riede.”
Non era camminata di palagio
la ’’v’ eravam, ma natural burella

ch’avea mal suolo e di lume disagio.
100

103

106

“Prima che de |’abisso mi divella,

maestro mio,” diss’ io quando fui dritto,
“a trarmi d’erro un poco mi favella:
ov’ é la ghiaccia? e questi com’ é fitto
si sottosopra? e come, in si poc’ ora,
da sera a mane ha fatto il sol tragitto?”
Ed elli a me: “Tu imagini ancora
d’esser di la dal centro, ov’ io mi presi
al pel del vermo reo che ’] mondo fora.
538

Canto 34

70

1

76

79

82

85

88
91

94

il

100

As it pleased him, I clung to his neck; and he

watched for time and place, and when the wings
were fully open
he took hold of the furry sides; from tuft to tuft
then he descended between the thick hair and the
frozen crust.
When we came to where the thigh is hinged,
exactly at the widest of the hips, my leader, with
labor and difficulty,
turned his head to where he had his shanks, and

clung to the pelt like one who climbs, so that I
supposed we were returning into Hell again.
“Hold fast, for by such stairs,” said my master,
panting like one weary, “must we depart from so
much evil.”
Next he went forth through the hole in the rock,

and placed me sitting on the nm; then he extended
his careful step to me.
I raised my eyes, thinking to see Lucifer as I had
left him, and I saw that he extended his legs upward;
and if I labored in thought then, let the gross
people ponder it who do not see what point it was
that I had passed.
“Rise up,” said my master, “on your feet; the way
is long and the path is difficult, and already the sun
has reached mid-tierce.”
That was no walk through a palace where we
were, but a natural cavern that had uneven ground
and lacked light.
“Before I am uprooted from the abyss, my master,”
said I, when I was erect, “speak to me a little to help

me out of error.
103

Where is the ice? and he, how is he fixed so
upside down? and how, in so little time, has the sun

106

made the passage from evening to morning?”
And he to me: “You imagine that you are still on
the other side of the center, where I laid hold on the

fur of this evil worm that gnaws the world.

oso

Inferno

109

Di 1a fosti cotanto quant’ io scesi;
quand’ io mi volsi, tu passasti ’] punto
al qual si traggon d’ogne parte 1 pesi.

112

E se’ or sotto l’emisperio giunto
ch’é contraposto a quel che la gran secca
coverchia, e sotto ’] cui colmo consunto

dS

118

121

124

127

130

133

fu l’uom che nacque e visse sanza pecca;
tu hai i piedi in su picciola spera
che l’altra faccia fa de la Giudecca.
Qui é da man, quando di la é sera;

e questi, che ne fé scala col pelo,
fitto é ancora si come prim’ era.
Da questa parte cadde git dal cielo;
e la terra, che pria di qua si sporse,
per paura di lui fé del mar velo,
e venne a l’emisperio nostro; e forse
per fuggir lui lascid qui loco voto
quella ch’appar di qua, e su ricorse.”
Luogo é la git da Belzebu remoto
tanto quanto la tomba si distende,
che non per vista, ma per suono € noto
d’un ruscelletto che quivi discende
per la buca d’un sasso ch’elli ha roso
col corso ch’elli avvolge, e poco pende.
Lo duca e io per quel cammino ascoso
intrammo a ritornar nel chiaro mondo;

e sanza cura aver d’alcun riposo
136

salimmo su, el primo e io secondo,

139

tanto ch’i’ vidi de le cose belle
che porta ’] ciel, per un pertugio tondo.
E quindi uscimmo a riveder le stelle.

540

Canto 34

109

You were on that side while I descended; when I

112

turned, you passed the point toward which the
weights all move from every direction.
And now you are beneath the hemisphere
opposite the one covered by the dry land, and under
whose high point died

115

the man who was born and lived without sin; you
have your feet on a little sphere that makes the other
face of the Judecca.

118

Here it is morning, when there it is evening; and
this one, who gave us a ladder with his fur, is still

fixed as he was earlier.
12

On this side he fell down from Heaven; and the

dry land, which previously extended over here, for
fear of him took the sea as a veil,
124

127

and came to our hemisphere; and perhaps what
does appear on this side left this empty space in
order to escape from him, and fled upward.”
There is a place down there, removed from
Beelzebub as far as the width of his tomb, known not

130

13S

by sight, but by the sound
of a little stream that descends through a hole in a
rock eroded by its winding course, and it is not
steep.
My leader and I entered on that hidden path to
return to the bright world; and, without taking
care for rest at all,

136

up we climbed, he first and I second, until I saw

1359

the beautiful things the heavens carry, through a
round opening.
And thence we came forth to look again at the
stars.

as
541

